{
   "title" : "Adventures on Perl Whirl 2000",
   "slug" : "/pub/2000/06/perlwhirl.html",
   "date" : "2000-06-13T00:00:00-08:00",
   "draft" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "adam-turoff"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "categories" : "Community",
   "tags" : [],
   "description" : "Adventures on Perl Whirl 2000 -> Can a tech conference on a luxury cruise boat possibly be legitimate? Sure it is, and then some. This past Memorial Day, I joined about 200 attendees on Perl Whirl 2000, the inaugural Geek...",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





\
\
Can a tech conference on a luxury cruise boat possibly be legitimate?
Sure it is, and then some.

This past Memorial Day, I joined about 200 attendees on Perl Whirl 2000,
the inaugural Geek Cruise. All in all, we found that not only was there
a mind-blowingly good set of tutorials available, but there was more
time to meet and chat with fellow Perl hackers than there is at most
conferences.

Honestly, I knew I was going on the Perl Whirl, but the idea took a
while to set in. When I received my tickets, it still seemed unreal.
When I started packing my bags, it seemed like just another conference.
When I boarded the plane, it was just another trip. When I arrived at my
hotel in Vancouver, reality began to set in: I'm going on a Cruise. To
Alaska. Talking about Perl all along the way. Soon, we would board
Holland America's m.s. Volendam and kick off Perl Whirl 2000.

From the very beginning, the cruise exuded a palpable air of calm. Gone
was the normal harried conference mentality where every minute is either
spent agonizing over which great presentation to attend or which great
conversation to continue in the hall. From the moment we left the
harbor, everyone had a laid-back attitude, as if to say \`\`I can find
you later, we have a week together and plenty of time to talk''. And
that made all the difference.

Anyone who thought this wasn't a serious conference was in for a big
surprise. Although there were many social events, sometimes starting at
10 or 11 PM, the tutorials started at 8:30am and continued until 5 PM.
(The schedule was just packed, and I'm not the only one who was hurting
around 8am, especially when we had to adjust our clocks into and out of
Alaska Time.) Three full days of tutorials were offered across three to
five tracks, with the middle day being split into two half-day chunks.
Ten extra hours of conference programming were available in roughly
ninety-minute chunks before dinner on some nights. Then there was the
B-Movie marathon. Then there were the cocktail parties. Then there were
all of the other events organized by the ship's cruise director. Yes,
the schedule was truly packed.

Even with such a dense schedule, there was plenty of time to unwind. We
could all eat a nice long, lingering dinner in the main dining room (or
take dinner on the Lido deck in shorts and T-shirts, or just order room
service), and gradually reconvene in the Crow's Nest after dinner for a
few drinks (or not), and lots of after-dinner conversation until the
dusk finally gave way to pre-dawn twilight around 3am.

What were the seminars themselves like? Some of the presenters were
incredibly popular, like Mark-Jason Dominus, Tom Christiansen, Tim Bray
and Lincoln Stein. The bits and pieces I sat through were simply
stellar, without exception. Many people I talked to echoed the common
conference complaint, \`\`there's too much good stuff to see, and too
many great presentations conflict with each other''. Sadly, every
conference organizer heard this before, and such conflicts are bound to
appear as soon as a schedule is produced.

While I didn't sit through most of the seminar program, I did sit
through the entire pre-dinner program. Here attendees got to hear some
great things people are doing with Perl. The first pre-dinner talk was
by Steven Roberts who talked about his Microship project. Some people
may remember Steve as the man behind Behemoth, the recumbent bicycle and
trailer with more computing power than an average dentist's office.
Steve's current project is a pair of boats with similar amounts of
computing power that will soon travel the inland and coastal waters of
the United States. Steve's team recently realized that projects such as
this live and die on volunteer effort, and while it is quite easy to
find Perl hackers to write and upgrade Perl CGI programs, it is quite
difficult to find NewtonScript programmers willing to donate their time
to a project like this. This observation drove Steve and his team to
replace a Newton-based management console with a simple web browser
running against an on-board linux-based web server.

Steve's talk went over incredibly well, and I was among a small group of
people on the boat who couldn't stop talking about it all week. The
enthusiasm behind this ninety minute presentation was so much more than
expected that it helped everyone involved with GeekCruises realize that
we never set aside any time for BOFs (\`\`birds of a feather''
sessions). Once again, the unharried, laid-back atmosphere came back to
help us, and we found a block of time that didn't conflict with any
other programming and just met beside the pool (conveniently placed near
a totally unhealthy amount of dessert).

Two nights later, we were privileged to hear John Clutterbuck discuss
how Perl saved the Land Registry System in Scotland, displacing Java,
cross-platform toolkits and 4GL environments in the process. The crux of
John's talk was about implementing a typical n-tier client-server
system. Instead of using a more \`\`traditional'' tool like Java, Visual
Basic or other such environments, John's team used Perl/TK to create
graphical client programs. One of the major reasons why Perl was a good
choice for this project was that Perl was already in use internally to
munge incoming data feeds. When it was time to implement this project,
Perl/TK was not another new skill requiring downtime and retraining; it
was just another library to use alongside the DBI.

There were other great non-seminar presentations. Tim Bray talked about
standards, standards organizations, and encouraged everyone to complain
loudly when our vendors don't implement standards that matter to us,
implement them poorly, or misimplement them intentionally. The next
night, Larry Wall guest-hosted Jon Orwant's Internet Quiz show, which
was quite fun. The cruise program wound up about a day later, when Larry
was available for an open-ended question and answer session. This Q&A
was quite refreshing, because the questions were frequently deep, often
thought-provoking, and always brought out an honest, uncensored answer
from Larry (unless his wife Gloria pre-empted him).

Oh, did I mention that this was a cruise? With all these Perl-ish events
all week, it was easy to forget at times that we were in the midst of
some of the most beautiful parts of North America. While we were
cruising north, we witnessed an endless parade of tree-lined mountains
of British Columbia and Alaska. Our itinerary also brought us into
Glacier Bay, where we saw the big ice break apart in the morning and
watched for whales in the afternoon.

And what's the point of cruising to Alaska if you're not going to get
off the boat and actually see Alaska? Our itinerary offered three ports
of call. Our first port was Juneau, the largest city in southeast
Alaska. Although Juneau may be too small to have a Kinko's, it is plenty
large enough to have one of the finest breweries in North America.
Around forty Perl Whirl passengers gathered together to go on a Pub
Crawl over Juneau while we were docked. Our first stop was the Alaska
Brewing Company, voted best brewery in America three years running at
the Great American Beer Festival (they are now enshrined in the GABF's
\`\`Hall of Foam''). After leaving the brewery, we visited some other
local watering holes and passed by the wondrous Mendenhall Glacier. Our
crawl ended up near the dock at the Mt. Roberts tram. At the top of Mt.
Roberts, we found ourselves in bright sunlight at 9 PM on the last day
in May, making snowballs behind the observation deck. When life gives
you a chance to make snowballs in Alaska when it's warm enough to wear
shorts and sandals, it's best to take advantage of the opportunity.

The next day, we found ourselves in Skagway, a small town north of
Juneau where the main industry is obviously tourism. The helicopter pad
at the end of the dock says so loud and clear. At this point in our
travels, I must admit that I welcomed a quiet day wandering through this
small town, perhaps reading a bit of the Cryptonomicon on a sunny patch
of turf. After a quick stroll, I bumped into Tom Christiansen, who asked
me if I was up for a little walk. I briefly forgot that Tom lives in
Boulder, Colorado; when he says \`\`little walk'', most other people
interpret that as \`\`a hike in the woods''. I joined Tom, and we had a
wonderful afternoon wandering through a lush green trail that started at
the edge of Skagway. When we reached our destination, we were surrounded
by on all sides by the largest fjord in North America. All in all, it
was the most enjoyable day I spent on the cruise.

After our wanderings through Glacier Bay, we wound up in Ketchikan, our
last port of call. I decided it was time wander aimlessly with my
friends Monty and Julie Taylor. Julie peeled off early that morning and
would later catch a 34-inch salmon on a fishing excursion. Monty and I
were up for some local flavor and eventually found Anabelle's, a great
little restaurant that serves a stunningly good seafood chowder and
beer-battered halibut and chips. Paired with a fresh pint or two of
Alaskan Amber, and this is easily the best meal I had all week, and the
chefs on board the Volendam provided some stiff competition. If I ever
return to Ketchikan, you can find me at Anabelle's.

Speaking of excursions, I didn't sign up for any mountain bike rides,
helicopter rides, sea-plane tours, hikes or fishing. Lots of people did,
but I'm a city boy who likes meandering through town, and the occasional
hike in the woods. And I had a great time doing just that.

All in all, I had a wonderful time on Perl Whirl 2000. The Perl was
great and Alaska was too (or maybe the other way around). Will I return
to Alaska again? Perhaps. Will I return to Alaska on a future Perl
Whirl? Just try and stop me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   If you haven't seen it already, you might want to check out [the 31
    things Tim Bray learned on the
    cruise](http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/network/2000/06/06/geekcruise.html).
    It has pictures, including one of Larry in one of his many tuxedos.
-   It turns out to be surprisingly easy to keep up an 8 AM - 11 PM
    schedule when the sun doesn't start setting until 9 PM and then
    comes up again at 3 AM.
-   I can attest to the laid-back attitude on the cruise. Everyone I met
    was kind and friendly, which isn't always the case at shorter
    conferences in less delightful venues.
-   In Glacier Bay, if you were quiet, you could hear the glacier
    creaking and popping as it slid into the sea. I had heard stories of
    glaciers calving, which is when a piece breaks off and falls into
    the water. (This is where icebergs come from.) I had always imagined
    that this was a comparatively rare event, that if you watched the
    glacier every moment for a whole day, you might, if you were lucky,
    see a piece break off. Wrong! Stuff is breaking off the glacier all
    the time and you only have to watch for a few minutes before
    something happens.
-   Downsides of the cruise ship: Sometimes other cruise activities
    interfered with the conference. For example, Dori Smith's Javascript
    class was held in a small room just off the main dining room, where
    a wine-tasting session was in progress, and it was hard to hear Dori
    over the amplified voice of the wine expert. Similarly, one of my
    classes was in the room immediately adjacent to the
    casino---fortunately there was a door I could use to shut out the
    slot machine racket.
-   My favorite cruise story: I got to interrupt my regex class so that
    we could rush over to the windows and look at the whales off the
    side of the ship.
-   Finally: Adam says it was easy to forget that we were in the midst
    of some of the most beautiful parts of North America. It wasn't easy
    for me to forget, and I spent most of my free time just staring out
    of various windows.

*--Mark Dominus*


