{
   "description" : " Table of Contents Program overview Initialization The callbacks Conclusion Gnome is the desktop environment of choice on my home Linux system because it is feature-packed and user friendly. Gnome is also flexible, and thanks to the Gtk-Perl module and...",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "title" : "A Simple Gnome Panel Applet",
   "slug" : "/pub/2001/03/27/gnome.html",
   "date" : "2001-03-27T00:00:00-08:00",
   "draft" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "joe-nasal"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "tags" : [],
   "categories" : "apps"
}





\

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Table of Contents                                                     |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| •[Program overview](#overview)\                                       |
| •[Initialization](#intialization)\                                    |
| •[The callbacks](#callbacks)\                                         |
| •[Conclusion](#conclusion)\                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Gnome is the desktop environment of choice on my home Linux system
because it is feature-packed and user friendly. Gnome is also flexible,
and thanks to the Gtk-Perl module and associated desktop toolkit
bindings, I can use my favorite programming language to further
customize and extend my Gnome environment.

This article shows how a useful Gnome tool can be built in an afternoon.
It is also an example of some common techniques to employ when doing
this sort of GUI programming, including widget creation, signal
handling, timers, and event loops. It also covers some Perl basics, in
review. So, read on and you may be inspired to write some Gnome
applications of your own.

[Download the source code](/media/_pub_2001_03_27_gnome/ping_gateway.pl)
referred to in this article.

### Gnome

On a Gnome desktop, the panel contains a variety of buttons and other
widgets which serve to launch applications, display menus, and other
common functions. It's standard desktop fare, like the Microsoft Windows
Start menu.

An *applet* is a particular kind of Gnome application, which resides
within and operates on the panel itself. The Gnome distribution comes
with several of these including a variety of clocks, the Game of Life,
and system resource utilization monitors. The Gtk-Perl module enables a
Perl programmer to create custom Gnome panel applets, and many other
GUI-related applications.

The Gnome panel applet we'll build finds the local host's default TCP/IP
gateway and displays the gateway's status on a button in the applet.
When the button is in an "off" position the gateway is not polled
(Figure 1).

![Gnome gateway not polled](/images/_pub_2001_03_27_gnome/figure1.jpg)\
\
**Fig. 1: Gnome Gateway in the "off" position.**

When the button is on, the gateway is polled at scheduled intervals and
the button's label is updated with the result: (Figures 2a & 2b)
response or non-response.

![Gnome gateway polled](/images/_pub_2001_03_27_gnome/figure2.jpg)\
\
**Fig. 2a: Gnome Gateway in the "on" position.**

![Gnome gateway polled](/images/_pub_2001_03_27_gnome/figure2b.jpg)\
\
**Fig. 2b: Gnome Gateway not available.**
This diagnostic may be used to regularly and unobtrusively report the
status of the local network relative to the machine's default gateway.
Check the button's label to see how things are faring on the upstream
network.

The applet uses the system commands `netstat` and `ping` familiar to
Unix users, and system and network admins.

### [Program overview]{#overview}

The top-level code in the script is lines 1 through 21. Lines 23 through
69 define subroutines. One subroutine is called by our code
(`fetch_gateway`), but two others are "callbacks" (`check_gateway` and
`reset_state`). A callback is a subroutine that will be called by the
Gnome code when something happens -- for example, a timer expires or
button gets clicked. Now, let's see what we can learn about how the
application works.

### [Initialization]{#intialization}

Line 3 indicates that we'll be using the Gnome module. `Gnome.pm` is
distributed with the Gtk-Perl package. The program discussed here has
developed against Gtk-Perl version 0.7003. `Gnome.pm` requires separate
installation: download and unpack Gtk-Perl, install it, and then change
directories into the GdkImlib and Gnome distribution and install them
too. If you want to develop panel applets (as we're doing here) you'll
need to append the build option `--with-panel` to the end of the usual
`perl Makefile.PL` portion of the install process:

      perl Makefile.PL --with-panel

Although `Gnome.pm` hasn't made it to Version 1.0 yet I've found it to
be stable. The biggest problem is the lack of documentation.

Lines 5 and 6 initialize a new AppletWidget object in `$a`. This object
is the container for all the doodads that will be part of our applet.
Line 8 creates a label for use when our button is in the "off" position.

Line 10 creates a timer. The prototype for the `Gtk->timeout_add`
function is:

      Gtk->timeout_add( $interval, \&function, @function_data );

Here our interval is 20000 (this value is in milliseconds, so the timer
will go off every 20 seconds), and the function to be called when the
timer goes off is `check_gateway`. We could use the third parameter to
pass some data into the `check_gateway` function if it were appropriate
to do so. In this case it isn't necessary.

Line 11 creates a new ToggleButton object in `$button`, and labels it
"off".

Line 12 registers the other callback in this application. This one will
be called when a particular "signal" occurs within Gnome. These aren't
normal Unix signals like `SIGINT` and `SIGCHLD`, but GUI events. In this
case, the event is "clicked". The ToggleButton widget also has the
signals "pressed", "released", "enter", and "leave", each of which is
emitted in response to either actions of the mouse pointer or a function
call, such as `$button->pressed()`. In our application, Gnome will call
`reset_state()` whenever `ToggleButton $button` is clicked.

Line 14 sets the size of the button to be a square with sides of 50
pixels. This is a good fit for the default Gnome panel. Gnome uses
global theme and style information to determine how the button is to be
drawn: line, color, shadow, etc. Line 15 calls the button's `show`
method, indicating that we're finished setting its attributes and that
it is ready for display. Line 16 adds the button to the applet.
Technically, we've packed the ToggleButton widget into the AppletWidget
container by invoking the AppletWidget's add method on the ToggleButton.
The ToggleButton is now a "child" of its container. At line 17 the
applet is allowed to be visible by calling its `show` method as well. A
widget's children will not be displayed until the parent's `show` method
is invoked.

Line 19 calls the `fetch_gateway` routine to gather in the local host's
default TCP/IP gateway. In that subroutine, `` `netstat -rn` `` captures
the local routing table, returning all addresses in dotted quad
+notation. The test in line 30 gets triggered by the IP address
+0.0.0.0, which indicates the default gateway. When it matches, the
+gateway's name is looked up from the IP address, and stored in the
+variable \$hostname. Finally, we translate this value to lowercase,
which will look better when we finally display it on the button. Then
`fetch_gateway` returns.

At line 21, we're ready to hand off to the `gtk_main` event loop, which
is responsible for drawing the application on the screen and managing
user interaction. At this point, our only interface with the application
will be through signal handling and callback functions. The Gnome
Toolkit (GTK) is event driven: once we enter `gtk_main` the application
stays put until an event occurs (caught via a signal) and the associated
callback function is invoked. Therefore, we should have completed all of
our application setup beforehand.

### [The callbacks]{#callbacks}

Now let's examine the two callback functions: `reset_state`, associated
with catching a "clicked" signal on our button (line 12); and
check\_gateway, associated with the timer (line 10).

At line 38, we query the state of the toggle button by invoking its
`get_active method`. This returns 0 if the button is off and 1 if it is
on. By default, the ToggleButton widget has one child -- its own label.
We label the button with the contents of `$off_label` if it is in the
OFF position or the string "Wait" if it is in the ON position (figure 3)
because we know that `check_gateway` is going to be called soon (within
the next 20 seconds). Part of `check_gateway`'s job is to update the
button with the status of our TCP/IP gateway, the whole point of this
applet.

![Gnome gateway waiting](/images/_pub_2001_03_27_gnome/figure3.jpg)\
\
**Fig. 3: Gnome Gateway waiting.**

Line 53 stores either the value in `$hostname` or the string "gateway",
depending upon whether or not `$hostname` is longer than eight
characters (lines 47-52). This is the number of characters that will fit
comfortably on one line within the button's label.

If the button is in the ON position (line 55), we go ahead and attempt
to ping the gateway with a single ICMP packet, redirecting `STDOUT` and
`STDERR` to the round-file. We don't care about the output of the `ping`
command, only it's return value, so we execute the command via
`system()`. `Ping` will return 0 upon success (gateway alive) and
something else if it fails (probably because the gateway is dead), so we
check the result and update the button's label appropriately in lines
59-66.

We want `check_gateway` to continue to be called, every 20 seconds,
until the application terminates. So, at line 68 the function returns a
true value. A true return value will allow further execution of a
timer's callback function while a false return value forces the opposite
behavior.

Note that 20 seconds is enough time to allow the call to `ping` to
timeout and return a value to the application. It is also an appropriate
level of resolution for this kind of discovery activity: If information
about the status of my gateway is at most 20 seconds old, then I'm
happy. Your mileage may vary, of course.

### [Conclusion]{#conclusion}

It's easy to write Gnome applets in Perl. This simple example showed you
the basic elements of Gnome programming, including the event model and
callbacks. Go forth and hack your own applet!


