{
   "draft" : null,
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "chromatic"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "description" : "The first Rakudo Star release is out, making Perl 6 available to a wider range of users.  Welcome to the new era of Perl.",
   "date" : "2010-07-29T06:00:01-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2010/07/welcome-rakudo-star",
   "categories" : "Perl-6",
   "title" : "Welcome Rakudo Star",
   "tags" : [
      "announcements",
      "perl",
      "perl-5",
      "perl-6",
      "rakudo"
   ]
}





[Perl 6](http://www.perl6.org/) has evolved over a long time. As
originally conceived, it was to be a modest cleanup of Perl 5 semantics
and implementation. By shrugging off a few of the less desirable
features and misfeatures, Perl the language could evolve in new ways.

As it turns out, a language is more than a bundle of features. It's a
set of design principles which govern interlocking syntax and semantics
and idioms. The greater the internal consistency of that philosophy, the
greater the coherence of the language and its community and its
ecosystem.

Given the chance to reinvent Perl one more time (the first reinvention
was Perl 4 to Perl 5), could the community produce a language which
could evolve to meet the needs of programmers for at least the next
twenty years? Could we do so without all of the pain and tension between
the need to retain backwards compatibility and the desire to improve
based on real world experiences?

That task was larger than any of us could have predicted, but the
results (Perl's testing culture! Roles! Moose! Grammars!) demonstrate
their utility even now, even in the Perl 5 world. Both languages feed
off of the other. Both languages help us to research and define and
refine what Perl is and what Perl can be.

[Rakudo Star](http://rakudo.org/announce/rakudo-star/2010.07) is a
milestone in that process. We're proud of what we've accomplished, and
we've reached a point where we want to share it with the wider world.

People will complain. They don't like twigils. (They don't like sigils!)
All they ever wanted was a better object system. They hate operators or
Unicode operators. They don't want to learn how multiple dispatch works.
They miss the CPAN. They prefer homoiconicity of syntax. They feel
betrayed that after ten years, Rakudo Star is the first of several
distribution releases and not the final, it's completely finished that's
it, install it to run your space station, release...

... as if designing a language intended to evolve and change and adapt
over the next several decades were a simple, three-month task to produce
a perfect, static, never-needs-updating specification. (Implementation
is merely a matter of hiring enough typists, you see.)

That's neither what Perl 6 is nor how it works. What matters now is that
you—yes, you—can download and install and play with Perl 6 right now.
It's not complete, whatever that means. It's not finished, because
twenty years from now we'll still release new versions to meet needs
that we can't possibly predict right now.

What we *can* do is figure out what *you* need. What works for you? What
doesn't? Are there bugs to fix? Are there particular optimizations you'd
like to see? (Our next big task is optimization.) Now begins the work of
polishing. What can we do to make Perl 6 even more amazing for you for
the next release of [Rakudo](http://www.rakudo.org/) and the next and
the next and the next?

Set aside your assumptions. Try Perl 6 yourself with Rakudo Star. Perl
in every form is the work of a community willing to make amazing things
happen. That task continues—help us make Perl more powerful, more
flexible, more useful, and more fun.


