{
   "draft" : null,
   "slug" : "/pub/2001/12/p6pdigest/20011215",
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot-0-0-3"
   ],
   "date" : "2001-12-19T00:00:00-08:00",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "description" : " Notes You can subscribe to an email version of this summary by sending an empty message to perl6-digest-subscribe@netthink.co.uk. This summary, as with past summaries, can be found in here. Please send additions, submissions, corrections, kudos, and complaints to bwarnock@capita.com....",
   "title" : "This Week on Perl 6 (9 - 15 December 2001)",
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "bryan-warnock"
   ]
}





### [Notes]{#Notes}

You can subscribe to an email version of this summary by sending an
empty message to <perl6-digest-subscribe@netthink.co.uk>.

This summary, as with past summaries, can be found in
[here](http://members.home.com/bcwarno/Perl6/digests/). Please send
additions, submissions, corrections, kudos, and complaints to
<bwarnock@capita.com>.

For more information on the Perl 6 and Parrot development efforts, visit
[dev.perl.org](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/) and
[parrotcode.org](http://www.parrotcode.org/).

There were 137 messages across 44 threads, with 41 authors contributing.

### [Slice Context]{#Slice_Context}

(10 posts) Piers Cawley
[gave](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg08814.html)
a huge list of slice examples, wondering what the expected context would
be.

Damian Conway's
[first](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg08815.html),
[second](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg08810.html),
and
[third](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg08813.html)
answers and explanations.

### [Make `make` Make]{#Make_make_Make}

(33 posts) There were several threads centered around getting `make` to
work everywhere - with `nmake` being the most problematic.

Jaen Saul had not
[one](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg06952.html),
but
[two](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg06969.html)
major threads on `nmake` incompatibilities in the Parrot makefile,
causing a failed build on Win32. Both Jeff Goff and Robert Spier are
working on a complete Perl replacement for the build process. (With Jeff
having already committed a
[preliminary](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg06989.html)
one.)

-   Jaen Saul
    [provided](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg06966.html)
    a temporary solution one of his problems.
-   Andy Dougherty and Garrett Goebel both tentatively
    [fixed](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07006.html)
    some of the other Win32 problems.
-   Robert Spier
    [patched](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07039.html)` distclean`
    to keep any CVS-related files.

### [Performance Patches]{#Performance_Patches}

(5 posts) Jeff Goff
[committed](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07017.html)
an early version of a Parrot optimizer, while Gregor Purdy
[submitted](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg06941.html)
a simple JIT runtime loop for experimentation.

### [Aggregates]{#Aggregates}

(1 post) Jeff Goff also [turned
in](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg06939.html)
the aggregate keys code, leading the way for development on arrays and
hashes.

### [Bytecode Portability]{#Bytecode_Portability}

(7 posts) Bryan C. Warnock
[posted](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg06918.html)
his thoughts on Parrot bytecode.

### [Parroty Bits]{#Parroty_Bits}

Dave Mitchell has finally been given a PDD number (7) for the coding
standards, so they should be up on
[dev.perl.org](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/pdd/) soon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Bryan C. Warnock](http://members.home.com/bcwarno/Perl6/)


