{
   "draft" : null,
   "title" : "This Week in Perl 6, through August 2, 2005",
   "date" : "2005-08-08T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2005/08/p6pdigest/20050804.html",
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "tags" : [
      "compiler",
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6",
      "pge",
      "pugs",
      "vm-development"
   ],
   "authors" : [
      "piers-cawley"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "description" : " In case you were wondering, Darwin ports didn't work its magic and I still don't have a working Haskell compiler. Thank Juerd for feather, even if I did have to turn my laptop upside down to read the MOTD....",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





\
In case you were wondering, Darwin ports didn't work its magic and I
still don't have a working Haskell compiler. Thank Juerd for feather,
even if I did have to turn my laptop upside down to read the MOTD.
Rot-180: oN hes +snf

### This week in *perl6-compiler*

There were 12 messages in the compiler list this week. Either everyone
has decamped to IRC or OSCON, or the compiler's getting mature enough
that most of the interesting discussion about it happens in
*perl6-language* as Autrijus and others seek clarification.

#### [Some Thoughts on PIL/Complete Type Inferencing](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050728205921.GA61292@aut.dyndns.org)

Autrijus has been doing some thinking on the next version of PIL (The
Pugs Intermediate Language), which will be a little less tightly coupled
with PIR/Parrot. He outlined his thinking (which he seems to have
directed towards being able to do useful things and optimizations with
Type information) in this thread.

#### [Definition of Containers](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050730224910.GB5372@aut.dyndns.org)

Autrijus announced that he'd checked in the first part of the new PIL
run core. In case you were wondering, containers are the things that
Perl variables have as values. They're where things like `tie` magic
happens.

#### [Hoisting Variable Declarations](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050731180628.GC15882@aut.dyndns.org)

Hands up! How does the scoping of

     
       $x = $x + my $x if $x;
       #1   #2      #3    #4
    }

work in Perl 6?

In Perl 5, all those `$x`s refer to the same thing. In Perl 6, \#1 and
\#2 refer to `$OUTER::x`.

This behavior (lexical scopes really are lexical) makes a compiler
writer's head hurt. Autrijus outlined a plan for making it work.

### Meanwhile, in *perl6-internals*

#### [Dominance Frontier](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d69e4b22417d1c7/4ed1469ec095319d)

Curtis Rawls had posted a patch adding "dominance frontiers" to IMCC.
(I'm afraid I don't know what a dominance frontier is, but it sounds
like it might be fun.) This week, he wondered if someone could apply it
any time soon, because he had another patch that depended on it.

It turned out that the patch broke a test or two, and Will Coleda, Andy
Dougherty, Patrick, and Leo set about helping to track it down. It looks
like they have found the issues, and work continues to fix them.

#### `make languages` Should Continue After Building a Language [Failed](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-3.0.11-36647-118350.14.1074362091832@perl.org)

Have you ever looked through the Parrot Makefiles and wondered what the
deal is with `.dummy`? If so, this thread explains everything.

#### [PMC Syntax](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=42E7E7EC.1040907@home.nl)

Klaas-Jan Stol asked if there's any documentation on the complete syntax
for *.pmc* files when writing PMCs. Apparently there isn't, apart from
the source of *pmc2c.pl*, but Will Coleda and Leo helped Klaas-Jan out.

#### [Embedding ParTcl](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=42E838DC.9080804@web.de)

Thilo Planz had some problems embedding ParTcl into a PIR application.
It mostly worked, but he had a few questions. Will Coleda helped out
again.

#### [Compiling Dynamic PMCs](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=42E8A3A2.5010100@home.nl)

Klaas-Jan had more questions about compiling PMCs--dynamic ones, this
time. It appears that the docs he was following didn't quite reflect
reality. Leo solved the problem and Klaas-Jan sent in a doc patch.
Hurrah!

#### [Parrot Cannot Start up if `STDERR` or `STDOUT` is Closed](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-3.0.11-36677-118403.17.3306028943918@perl.org)

Michael Schwern pointed out that Parrot won't start if you close either
`STDOUT` or `STDERR`, eschewing the standard joke response ("Doctor, it
hurts when I do this." "Well don't do that, then.") Jerry Gay wrote a
test and Leo fixed it.

#### [Accessing Hash with Strings/Keys](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=42E9EAF7.1050509@home.nl)

Apparently, Klaas-Jan is working on writing a Lua compiler to target
Parrot. He's obviously working on it a good deal at the moment. :)

He wanted to know how he could extend the standard Hash PMC to return
`None` if there is no key found. As is traditional in these cases, Leo
helped him out. It turns out that part of the problem is that *pmc2c.pl*
isn't that strict in its syntax checking. If anyone reading this has the
tuits ...

#### [Does It Cost Anything to Use a Big PMC Everywhere?](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050729165847.70341.qmail@web51110.mail.yahoo.com)

In a move guaranteed to gladden at least Dan Sugalski's heart, Amir
Karger popped up to say that he's working getting the Z-machine
interpreter working. He wondered if there was any way of dedicating a
register to a particular constant in order to avoid copying a global
every time he called a sub. Leo helped out.

#### [Super!](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=42ECDE37.2010308@toetsch.at)

Leo announced that he'd added a new `Super` PMC which will make it
easier to call superclass methods.

#### [Lua Project](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=42EF7E8F.9010304@home.nl)

Klaas-Jan unveiled his project to get the [Lua compiler targeting
Parrot](http://members.home.nl/joeijoei/parrot). It's apparently "far
from complete," but hey, it's good to welcome yet another language to
the Parrot cage.

#### [Announcing `mod_parrot` 0.3](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0508021908110.3368-100000@booger.sixgeeks.org)

Jeff Horwitz announced the release of [`mod_parrot`
0.3](http://www.smashing.org/mod_parrot), complete with support for all
Apache hooks, autogeneration of `request_rec` methods, and a `mod_pugs`
proof of concept. Crumbs. And there's more. Check out the announcement,
download the code, and start making Apache do weird things. Go on, you
know you want to.

### Meanwhile, in *perl6-language*

#### [The Use and Abuse of Liskov](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg20981.html)

Damian and Luke's discussion of the right way to do MMD looks to be
finally winding down. It seems Luke's convinced Damian of the
righteousness of his cause. (Or at least, if he's wrong, he's wrong in a
subtler way than Damian realized.) I don't think there's been a final
decision as yet, but we're definitely moving forward.

#### [Slurpy Parameters and Auto-Flattening](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21085.html)

Ingo Blechschmidt asked for some clarification of the behavior of slurpy
parameters. It's not often I hope that Luke is wrong, but I really hope
the answer he gave Ingo isn't the true state of things.

#### [Exposing the Garbage Collector](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21067.html)

Bah! I propose a simple, slow, yet powerful feature that is useful to
implement a whole bunch of other possible APIs for getting at stuff, and
people go and suggest making any one of various heavier APIs the One
True API. It's enough to make a person despair.

Ah, apologies, I'm letting personal concerns get in the way of the
summary, but what the hell, I'm leaving it.

#### [Messing with the Type Hierarchy](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21092.html)

Luke had a few things to say about what happens when you monkey with the
type hierarchy, so he said them. The usual suspects joined in, most of
them addressing the particular instance that Luke had chosen to
illustrate his point, rather than discussing the broader point, but hey,
this is *perl6-language*. That's what happens.

Luke's broader question was, "Should it be possible to write a class
that isn't a leaf in the existing hierarchy?" The example that everyone
addressed was the idea of writing a `Complex` class that wedged in
between `Real` and `Num` in the hierarchy (which, as several people
pointed out, isn't necessarily the right way to think about it anyway,
hence the discussion).

My gut feeling was that the answer to the general question should be
"Yes, but be very, very careful, and don't be surprise if it bites you
later."

#### [Elimination of `Item|Pair` and `Any|Junction`](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21094.html)

The discussion of appropriate default prototypes and the like continued.
Autrijus proposed a way of rejigging the type hierarchy to make default
argument types a little clearer. I found things getting a little weird,
to be honest--there's even talk of eliminating `Object` as a type name,
which seems a little strange.

#### [Execution Platform Object? Gestalt?](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21098.html)

Randal proposed that, as the number of possible platforms that Perl 6
can run on proliferates, it'd be really handy if there were some useful
global that held knowledge about the platform and its capabilities. He
proposed `$*OS` as a decent place to put it. Larry thought we probably
would have something like that, but thought that there might end up
being two globals: `$*OS` and `$*VM`. The usual "Why don't we call it"
thread sprang up, but it seems that the most important upshot is that
this particular bike shed will definitely be painted.

#### [The Meaning of `returns`](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21114.html)

The continuing invasion by the rampaging hordes from *p6c* continued
apace. This time, Autrijus had a discussion on the implications of
`returns` and its implications for type inferencing.

#### [Lazy List Syntax](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21121.html)

Flavio S. Glock wondered how to go about creating a lazy list from an
object. Apparently the magic he was missing was `prefix:=`, which is
syntactic sugar for calling the `.next` method on anything that supports
iteration, which is nice.

#### [An Idea for Doing `pack`](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21121.html)

David Formosa had an idea about a possible `pack` API; he outlined it on
the list. Yuval Kogman seemed to like it, but there's been nothing from
anyone else on the list.

#### [Inferring `(Foo of Int).does(Foo of Any)`](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21124.html)

Autrijus again, this time thinking about the kind of type inferences
that Perl aggregate types allow. Once I had my head in the right space,
it made a great deal of sense, even if:

    Array of Item).does(Array of Int); # false
    Array of Int).does(Array of Item); # also false!

made my head hurt the first time I read it.

#### [Garbage Collector API](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21081.html)

Various people proposed additions to the proposed Garbage Collector API.

#### [`$value.confess()`](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21140.html)

Brent Royal-Gordon had a cunning idea for debugging: having Perl 6
capture the call stack at its point of creation and stashing that in a
property called `confess`, which he could examine in a debugging context
to find out where a value came from. As he pointed out, this would be
expensive, but useful. He's currently Warnocked, but I get the feeling
it should be possible to write an extension to do what he wants without
adding anything extra to Perl 6 itself. It might be a little tricky if
he wants the call stack to change on mutation, though.

#### [Slurpy `is rw` Arrays](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21148.html)

Having received clarification of the behavior of normal slurpy arrays,
Ingo Blechschmidt asked for clarification of the behavior of Slurp
`is rw` arrays. Adriano Ferreira and Thomas Sandlaß seemed to talk sense
in reply.

#### [Curious Use of `.assuming` in S06](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21154.html)

Autrijus wondered if code like:

    &textfrom := &substr.assuming(:str($text) :len(Inf))

found in Synopsis 6 was a mistake, or if the syntax should be like that.
It turns out that the syntax is supposed to be like that. Apparently
being able to do without the commas was one of the reasons for making
colon pair syntax look like that.

#### [Laziness and IO](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21158.html)

In a currently Warnocked post, David Formosa outlined a potential
problem with lazy IO.

#### [`sub foo ($x) returns ref($x)`](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21159.html)

In his continuing discussion of the Perl 6 type system and the
inferences that you can draw about it, Autrijus posted a discussion of
how to declare that a function that returns a value with the same type
as its argument. He suggested that the best way forward would be to
declare something like:

    sub identity ($x) returns ref($x) { ... }

and asked for better suggestions. Thomas Sandlaß had suggestions.

#### [`&say`'s Return Value](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21160.html)

Gaal Yahas thought that `&print` and `&say` should `fail` on errors and
return the printed string on success (but true). Larry thought not. It
looks like they'll end up returning a Boolean or throwing an exception.

#### [`$arrayref.ref`](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21161.html)

Ingo continues his ongoing task of getting clarification of the
semantics of a whole host of things. This time he wanted to know about
the behavior of references. Larry clarified.

#### [Binding Scalars to Aggregates](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21162.html)

Next up in Ingo's clarification project was binding scalars to
aggregates. (Or did he mean binding aggregates to scalars?) Again, Larry
came through with answers. It turns out that there's more to this than
meets the eye at first glance. Autrijus's post on containers over in
*perl6-compiler* addresses some of these issues, as well.

#### [Binding Hashes to Arrays?](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21163.html)

Ingo asks, "Is it legal to bind a hash to an array, or vice versa?"

Larry answers, "Not at the moment."

#### [Module Init Hooks and Pragmas](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21175.html)

Gaal Yahas wondered what function in a module to call when you `use` or
`no` it.

Warnock applies.

#### [Eliminating `&{}` and `*{}`](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21178.html)

Autrijus wondered if we really need the `&` sigil. Warnock applies.

#### [Stringification of Pairs](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21179.html)

For some reason, Ingo's shortest question ("How do pairs stringify?")
attracted the largest response. Well, at first blush it looks like it
did. What actually happened was that Warnock claimed it, but the
`References:` header in Andrew Shitov's posed discussed below was a
little broken.

#### [`zip` with ()](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21182.html)

Some strange behavior of `zip` caught out Andrew Shitov. Ingo explained
the problem. There was quite a bit of discussion of the various
subtleties exposed.

Sometimes I pity the poor swine who's going to have to write
*Programming Perl 6*. It's going to make the current camel look like a
slim volume, if we're not careful.

#### [Mutating `map` and `grep`](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-language%40perl.org/msg21185.html)

Ingo Blechschmidt wondered if it was true that Perl 6's `grep`, `map`,
etc., wouldn't allow mutating values in their source array. He wondered
if it would be possible to use a pragma to get the old, Perl-5-ish,
behavior back. Thomas Sandlaß wondered if simply explicitly declaring
the given block's argument as `rw` wouldn't do the job. There is no word
from @Larry yet.

#### Acknowledgements, Adverts, Apologies, Alliteration, and Conference Envy

Damn. Couldn't think of a word beginning with "a" that means
"conference." \[*Editor's note: attendance?*\] To all you lucky people
in Portland at OSCON, I wish I was there and am a seething mass of envy.
Well, not that seething: I'm consoling myself by going to the WorldCon
in Glasgow, instead.

#### Help Chip

[geeksunite.org](http://geeksunite.org/): tell all your friends; this
cannot stand.

### The Usual Footer

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl.

-   [The Perl Foundation](http://donate.perl-foundation.org/)
-   [Perl 6 development site](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/)

Or, you can check out [my website](http://www.bofh.org.uk/), now running
on a new engine. There are also [vaguely pretty photos by
me](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pdcawley).


