{
   "tags" : [
      "ide",
      "integrated-development-environment",
      "perl",
      "products",
      "reviews",
      "windows-95-98-nt"
   ],
   "categories" : "Tooling",
   "authors" : [
      "brent-michalski"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "draft" : null,
   "title" : "Perl Builder IDE Debuts",
   "slug" : "/pub/1998/07/review.html",
   "date" : "1998-07-22T00:00:00-08:00",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "description" : " Overview: Perl Builder, by Solutionsoft, is the first integrated development environment (IDE) for Perl. It allows you to develop and test Perl applications in a Windows 95/98/NT environment. Test Equipment: I tested Perl Builder on a machine with a..."
}





\
**Overview:**\
Perl Builder, by [Solutionsoft](http://www.solutionsoft.com), is the
first integrated development environment (IDE) for Perl. It allows you
to develop and test Perl applications in a Windows 95/98/NT environment.

**Test Equipment:**\
I tested Perl Builder on a machine with a Cyrix 6x86/200MHz processor
and 48Mb RAM using Windows 95 and then the same machine using Windows
98. Both of these test machines used the ActiveState Perl port. I also
tested Perl Builder on a Pentium 166 with 96Mb RAM running Windows NT.
This machine used the latest Gurusamy Sarathy port of Perl.

**Installation:**\
Installing Perl Builder took about 5 minutes. It was very simple and I
had no installation problems. I was surprised by the nice, clean
interface and yet the program was only around 750kb in size before
installation! To me, this is remarkable in an age where IDE's can easily
take over 100Mb of space. Granted, Perl Builder is really just a text
editor that integrates with Perl so there are no libraries or any
Perl-related files included with the program.

To use Perl Builder, you need to have Perl installed on your system. You
can use either the ActiveState Perl port or the "Gurusamy Sarathy" port
of Perl. Neither of which come with Perl Builder, but Solutionsoft does
provide links so that you can easily download them. I recommend the
"Gurusamy Sarathy" version.

Once installed, my first task was to run through the tutorial provided.
The tutorial walks you through creating a "mailto" form using an HTML
form that they provide. It worked as advertised and was an
easy-to-follow tutorial that provides you with a good overview of the
IDE.

**Programming Environment**\
Perl Builder is basically a text editor that has been written
specifically for writing Perl scripts. Perl Builder provides a simple
programming environment that is easy to get comfortable with. The
different windows in the IDE are "tabbed" for easy access. The normal
tabs are *Main Script, Input Values,* and *Output: HTML/Text*. Other
tabs, like *errors,* are added as needed.

![The Perl Builder
Window](/images/_pub_1998_07_review/perlbuilder.gif){width="450"
height="327"}\
**Figure 1: Perl Builder's visual editor**

The *Main Script* tab is the area where you actually write the script.
The code that you write is automatically color-coded by Perl Builder and
the colors are user-customizeable Having color-coded Perl code makes
viewing the code much easier. I found that once you get accustomed to
the colors, you can quickly scan the code for what you are looking for.

The *Input Values*tab allows you to specify either the values that you
would have sent from an HTML form if you are writing a CGI script. Or,
from STDIN if you are writing a non-CGI script.

The *Output* tab shows you what output your Perl application produced.
If you are writing a CGI script, there is a button on this tab that
allows you to view the code in a web browser. Perl Builder actually
takes the output from your script, and produces a local HTML file for
the browser view.

The *Errors* tab does exactly what you would expect it to do, it shows
you any errors that were generated by your script. The feature I liked
here is that you can double-click on the error, and you are taken right
to that line of code on the *Main Script* tab.

When a CGI script generates one or more e-mail messages, Perl Builder
also provides a tab that shows you what the e-mail(s) would look like.

**Debugging**\
Perl Builder includes some great features for debugging your code. You
can set breakpoints, watches, step through your code or do just about
anything that an IDE debugger should do. You can also run with "strict"
or evaluate your code with the -w flag.

**Nice Features**\
Perl Builder has many nice features. My favorites were:

-   *Editor-scripts\
    *The *Editor-scripts* menu item, my favorite tool, allows you to
    write Perl scripts that will be performed on your code. Solutionsoft
    includes a few like block-comment and block-uncomment. I wrote a
    quick one that allows me to add line-numbers to my code and replace
    all of the &lt; and &gt;'s in my code with their HTML equivalents.
    This saves me a great deal of time when I write code for articles.
    Now I just highlight the code, and let Perl Builder do everything
    for me.

    To use the editor scripts, all you do is highlight the code you want
    to perform the action on, and choose the appropriate item from the
    menu. The code is executed only on the part of your script that you
    highlighted. Plus, you don't have to learn any new "scripting
    languages", it is all customized with Perl code.

-   *Regular Expression Search/Replace\
    * This feature allows you to use the power of Perl and create
    complex search/replace regular expressions that are executed on your
    script.
-   *CGI Wizard\
    * The CGI Wizard in Perl Builder allows even non-programmers to
    write CGI scripts that can accept HTML form data, validate the
    entries, e-mail multiple messages to multiple recipients and
    generate response pages on-the-fly. The CGI Wizard steps you through
    the process and does 99% of the work for you. All you have to do is
    choose an HTML form, the wizard imports the variables and then steps
    you through the rest of the process.

**Weaknesses**\
Perl Builder is a great product, but there were a few items that I'd
like to see addressed.

-   The menu bar at the top of the IDE did not have a *print* button. I
    like to print my code out and draw all over it, while this is just a
    minor detail, I'd like to see it added.
-   When generating forms on-the-fly, Perl Builder only allows you to
    create and test the first form. You cannot test scripts on code that
    was dynamically generated. The ability to test the dynamically
    generated forms would add to the complexity of the program, but it
    is needed to fully test CGI scripts. I write many scripts that
    dynamically generate HTML forms and call themselves with these new
    forms.
-   When using the watch portion of the debugger, I found that when I
    closed the watch window I began getting errors from Perl even though
    none of the code had changed. I found that if I closed Perl Builder
    and restarted it, all was well again.
-   I also ran into a few graphic glitches while using the program. The
    graphic problems were much better than in the beta that I had tested
    previously but they were still annoying. I am confident that as this
    program evolves, this is still version 1.0 of the program, these
    glitches will be worked out.

**Wrapping It Up**\
Overall, Perl Builder is a great program and is something that should
have been developed a long time ago. It is a great tool for both
beginning Perl programmers, and experienced Perl programmers. Perl
Builder's clean interface and powerful features take much of the
unnecessary work out of Perl programming.

While it is not perfect, and can't handle some of the more complex Perl
programs, it is a great environment for developing most of your CGI
scripts. The ability to easily test your scripts locally is something
that makes CGI programming much easier.

The price for Perl Builder is \$149. Although I think that the price is
reasonable, I think it would do better if the price was around the \$99
range. Perl developers have become accustomed to free software and I
think that they may have a hard time spending almost \$150 for a
"helper" program.

Overall, I give Perl Builder a 4.5 out of 5 camel rating.

*Author's note: I was contacted by Solutionsoft and told that a version
1.0a would be released sometime this week. Version 1.0a is supposed to
fix many of the bugs that we found in version 1.0. An update to this
article will be added when I have had a chance to evaluate the new
version.*


