{
   "date" : "2005-03-24T00:00:00-08:00",
   "draft" : null,
   "tags" : [
      "compiler",
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "description" : " All~ Welcome to yet another fortnight's summary. I believe this is the highest volume I have ever seen the three lists at simultaneously. Hopefully they will keep it up, because they're doing good work. To aid the epic endeavor...",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "matt-fowles"
   ],
   "slug" : "/pub/2005/03/p6pdigest/20050321.html",
   "title" : "This Fortnight in Perl 6, March 7 - March 21, 2005"
}





All\~

Welcome to yet another fortnight's summary. I believe this is the
highest volume I have ever seen the three lists at simultaneously.
Hopefully they will keep it up, because they're doing good work. To aid
the epic endeavor of summarizing all this, I have had to add some new
Jazz to my playlist. We will see how it works out. If it doesn't work
well, blame Seton.

### Perl 6 Language

#### [The Actual Name of `&?SUB`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/038d53bce6baca3a/2bc5895525215f2f#2bc5895525215f2f)

David Storrs wanted to know how he could find the name of `&?SUB`. Larry
told him that `$?SUBNAME` would be the most reliable way to get the
short name.

#### [Unlimited Argument Patterns](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/2feef37c11edaa9e/4dd34d9d0ae95e5e#4dd34d9d0ae95e5e)

Luke Palmer has tasted the forbidden fruit of Haskell, and now he wants
more of it in Perl 6. In particular he wants even more powerful pattern
matching of arguments for MMD. Rod Adams speculated that Larry had
decided Perl 6 would not be ML. In the end there was no real consensus,
but the feeling seems to be to say "don't hold your breath".

#### [Limited Argument Patterns](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/bb118c7350c76657/6338e5bb22c89ba6#6338e5bb22c89ba6)

Wolverian was a little unsure of what exactly `sub foo(0) {...}` meant.
Larry explained that it was just sugar for
`sub foo ( $bar of Int where { $_ == 0 } $bar ) { ... }`.

#### [List Constructors](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/322bd2ced30a06d0/c39068c3b61f780e#c39068c3b61f780e)

Wolverian made a list of list constructors, asking what each did. Larry
explained: for the most part, they're the same thing as in Perl 5,
though a few will produce a warning.

#### [Decorating Primitives](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/086a99985beac390/80ca81ed0f831948#80ca81ed0f831948)

The question of how decorating objects with roles interacted with
low-level types arose. Larry came to the conclusion that it was okay,
unless you wanted to decorate a single element in a primitive array.

#### [Splat Operator in Assignment](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/31d8c3054628253c/e9f77f4a2edd9551#e9f77f4a2edd9551)

Juerd was unsure how splats and list assignment interacted. The answer
is that list assignment is exactly the same as Perl 5 to allow for
extending a return list.

#### [Logic Programming](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/63f9c15e5ef27c17/ccf0a7f26d229344#ccf0a7f26d229344)

Rod Adams pointed out that it's possible to implement much of logic
programming using the rules engine. Unfortunately, the syntax gets a
little hairy and cumbersome. Larry said that this particular goal might
be something that 6.0 does not address, deferring it instead. Ovid
rumbled about porting a Warren Abstract Machine to Parrot. I would like
it.

#### Locale-Keyed Text

Darren Duncan finished up the first non-core Perl 6 module. Being
properly hubristic, he asked for a critique. His questions touched on
subjects including subtypes, module loading, and strictness.

-   [Critique
    Request](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/5e1c7888b8b771c3/3f03a9a2ace1a375#3f03a9a2ace1a375)
-   [Misc
    Questions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/0757424a38d65e97/a4a53ed54d48d7f4#a4a53ed54d48d7f4)

#### [`bar $f =?= $f.bar`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/d718bf73790d072e/736a522e91cb0870#736a522e91cb0870)

Rod Adams wondered what would happen if he had both a sub and a method
named `bar`. What would `$f.bar` and `bar $f` do? Jonathan Scott Duff
explained that `$f.bar` would call the method while `bar $f` would call
the sub.

#### [MMD Object](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/42a32bb7c727de7e/5891f6a40d031af2#5891f6a40d031af2)

Rod Adams wants a single object to represent all of the possible multi
methods associated with a particular short name. It seems that Rod drank
some of the Lisp Kool-Aid (although in this case, I agree). He explained
how this allowed the dispatch scheme to be changed on a multi by multi
basis, and also allowed for nice introspection. This led to a discussion
of how this would work with lexically installed multi methods, and if
this would trip people up. No real consensus appeared.

#### [`:foo<o> != :foo('o'); :foo<o> == :foo{'o'}`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/77d165f146b6da7f/99893d787d04f496#99893d787d04f496)

Juerd wondered what the implications of `<a>` mapping to `('a')` were.
Larry replied that it did not map in that manner.

#### [Lazy Loading of Object](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/8d37df23ea9b1429/459494c94afe7681#459494c94afe7681)

Yuval Kogman wondered how he could get his objects to load lazily. Larry
told him that delegation would probably be the best bet.

#### [Throwing From Higher Up the Call Stack](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/1466172da2ed2c32/33e471f95f198b67#33e471f95f198b67)

Thomas Yandell wants a way to throw from further down the call stack.
Sadly, Warnock applied.

#### [`sprintf`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/b02884b476fe87c7/8c7be753bf0ee372#8c7be753bf0ee372)

Juerd wants a `sprintf`-like function `f/FORMAT/EXPR/`. Larry seems to
think that `EXPR.as(FORMAT)` will suffice, especially if it is a list
op.

#### S29, Built-in Functions

Rod Adams has been hard at work creating [a list of built-in Perl 6
functions](http://www.rodadams.net/Perl/S29.html). This led to good
discussions about which things had alternate forms and which did not.

-   [Discussion](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/1bf5b21a8dbb991a/02c5bfc9ab3bae9e#02c5bfc9ab3bae9e)
-   [More
    Discussion](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/17969d56c1fb86e0/3274abd0d8b8ed5c#3274abd0d8b8ed5c)

#### [Python to Eliminate `reduce()`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/d03b4d33ca8b5260/a6526b909001d7b8#a6526b909001d7b8)

Aristotle Pagaltzis posted a link explaining that Python 3000 will
eliminate `reduce`. This led to a brief discussion of various design
philosophies.

#### [SEND + MORE = JUNCTIONS](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/8127c2b44893bed4/387d5076256105db#387d5076256105db)

Sam Vilain fixed up the SEND + MORE example to work correctly with
junctions. Unfortunately, the hoops through which he had to jump are
pretty horrendous. Larry mumbled that the option of autothreading all
conditionals might work, but would send too many lynch mobs after him. I
for one like both Twin Peaks and that idea.

#### [`for` With a Function Reference](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/f89531093cc2e3da/cd015186c0b67a77#cd015186c0b67a77)

Rod Adams wanted to know how `for` would behave with various types of
functions or codeblocks. Luke Palmer provided answers.

#### [Adding Interfaces to Arguments](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/d7d6bd1506544ee5/9433d70b82708e82#9433d70b82708e82)

Thomas Sandla√ü wondered when arguments to function would be decorated
with roles from the function signature if they didn't exist. Larry
conjectured about allowing different views on objects versus mixing in
various roles. This led people to talk about covariant typing. An array
of ints will always return you a number and an array of numbers will
always accept an int, but an array of ints will not necessarily accept a
number and an array of numbers will not necessarily return an int. Thus,
changing your view can be valid when writing and not when reading, or
vice versa.

#### [Pugs too Lazy](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/2aca524a1203cd41/912bea4d0d05554a?q=surprised#912bea4d0d05554a)

Andrew Savige noticed that closing a file handle in Pugs did not force
all the thunks associated with the file. While this was a bug in Pugs,
it led to conversation about whether `=` should be lazy or eager. Larry
thinks that it will be safer to start eager and become lazy then vice
versa.

#### [`exists` and `delete` as Functions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/52274a6d4736795a/7886d251717dcbcf#7886d251717dcbcf)

Rod Adams wondered how he would define the signature of `exists` and
`delete` as they do not evaluate the subscripted variables in their
arguments. Larry explained that they are now methods on the hash, so
someone will have to do a little macro magic to get it to work the old
way.

#### [`remove(reset())`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/b83fa0819060ca02/e86555009e886e36#e86555009e886e36)

Steve Peters pointed out that `reset()` was now almost useless and has
been "vaguely deprecated" for a while. Larry declared it dead.

#### [Lists in String Context](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/d14425dbcd70da26/49ce257ba619e231#49ce257ba619e231)

Juerd put out a plea for lists in string context not to provide spaces
between elements automatically. Larry pointed out various ways to join
on the empty string, which I think is his way of saying "too bad".

#### [Popping a Multidimensional Array](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/00ea49729b4fb348/7352b8e80a4bec26#7352b8e80a4bec26)

Rod Adams wondered what it meant to pop a multidimensional array. Larry
agreed that it should pop off entire dimensions. Does this mean that
popping such an array in a loop will pop dimensions until there is only
one left, at which point it will switch to popping elements?

#### [Index Out of Bounds](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/5df636005a324a20/edfd61c7066429f0#edfd61c7066429f0)

Markus Laire wondered what `index("Hello", "", 999)` would return. Larry
explained that it is not as simple as Markus thinks, because strings use
magic indices that do Unicode stuff, but it would probably throw an
exception.

#### [GUI Paradigm](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/a9ed04e00bade7c0/52337570505cb3f5#52337570505cb3f5)

Michele Dondi wants Perl 6 to support a GUI paradigm better than most
languages currently do. He is not quite sure how, but he is sure that it
would be cool. I agree.

#### [Hiding From One's Callee](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/cba8748ebd6084c6/05cbce0b1ca98174#05cbce0b1ca98174)

Autrijus wants to call a function but make it appear as if his caller
did it. Larry suggested that `wrap`/`call` would be appropriate.

#### [`quotemeta`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/ae745954ee8361c6/fd6dc65151a03ae9#fd6dc65151a03ae9)

Rod Adams voted for axing `quotemeta`. People seemed to agree that it
should go, but they disagreed on what to use in its place. Larry
suggested an argument to `as`.

#### [`zip` Function Signature](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/be17e769ee1b3ae9/4da615a5a91eaf2b#4da615a5a91eaf2b)

Rod Adams `had` difficulty determining the function signature for
`&zip`. This led to a discussion of when `is rw` was implied, but not an
answer to his question.

#### [Symbol Table Interactions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/60dce44260f2a93d/8713b16d403879e5#8713b16d403879e5)

Gall Yahas wondered how `::()` would react to undefined variables. Larry
explained that it might be either legal or illegal as an lvalue
depending on whether or not the scope had finished being compiled, and
that it would be undefined as an rvalue.

#### [Propagating Called Context](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/601792cc6008e3b1/f3c5cdf9ab6c7a5c#f3c5cdf9ab6c7a5c)

Yuval Kogman wants to call a sub with the same context he was called in
so that he can munge the result(s). Warnock applies.

#### [`true(0)`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/027584c278aa0ecc/d658af04afb41def#d658af04afb41def)

Juerd suggested renaming `true`, as it was really counter-intuitive.
Much discussion ensued about alternatives. Larry hemmed for a bit, but
decided to stick with `true` in the end

#### [Junction Questions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/c31ccf483dbe1948/0b6c7014b4be8ff4#0b6c7014b4be8ff4)

Stevan Little wondered if the junctions in Pugs behaved correctly. Luke
Palmer assured him that they were for the examples he posted.

#### [POD vs. kwid : Round 1. FIGHT!](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/171cd34b1e84bf8c/5531a708a6b8a333#5531a708a6b8a333)

Aaron Sherman posted a rough draft of a better POD. This led to many
people passionately discussing the merits and demerits of POD and kwid.
Fortunately, as the summarizer endowed with the power of double
speaking, I can definitively report that the conclusion was that
everybody prefers both kwid over Pod and vim over emacs.

#### [Importing Constants From Another Module](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/e689486905f15375/b876a174c00da4b8#b876a174c00da4b8)

Song10 wanted to know how to import constants from another module into
his module without having to specify scope everywhere. Warnock applied.

#### [Returning References vs. Copies](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/eaf15ca9e032cfa1/53d856b79ec5aabd#53d856b79ec5aabd)

Darren Duncan wants to protect his classes from their malicious enemies
who would use his references against him. Thus, he wants to know if his
accessor methods return references or copies. Larry explained that they
would probably return lazy copies, to provide the requisite protection,
except when used inside that class.

#### [Precedence of `where`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/376a1703e186fdc7/e30509cf16667057#e30509cf16667057)

Chip Salzenberg wondered if `where` or `|` had higher precedence. Larry
replied that `where` is part of a magic group of declarational keywords
that did some weird stuff.

#### [Strings and Pain](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/a95fa7c746d4701a/caef6fe695f484cd#caef6fe695f484cd)

Rod Adams wants to change strings to deal with Unicode differently.
Larry thinks his idea forces the programmer into the machine's mindset
too much.

#### [Caller's Slurpy Array](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/7318f41d1354a449/6cae07180e484d20#6cae07180e484d20)

Rod Adams wants access to his caller's slurpy array and suggested that
it be `@_`. Larry agreed.

#### [lvalue Slices](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/2095c65253615777/250915713d504ccf#250915713d504ccf)

Matt Diephouse wants to assign to an array slice but doesn't know if he
can. He can.

#### [`.method`; `$self.method`; `$_.method`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/cf458503a5ec514f/9083077118873dd3#9083077118873dd3)

As originally specified, `.method` means `$_.method`. This sets it apart
from `$.foo`, `@.foo`, and `%.foo`, which all refer to `$self`. Much
discussion ensued. I think the pendulum is slowly swinging toward
switching the meaning of `.method` to refer to `$self.method`.

#### [Duff's Device](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/a42b280a81d56ae2/90c1b8d03c869e59#90c1b8d03c869e59)

Gaal Yahas lamented his inability to use Duff's Device in Perl 6. Larry
made noises that it might not be impossible, but would still not be a
good idea.

#### [The Fate of `study`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/6534a326e4840512/bed755ec9ba75c14#bed755ec9ba75c14)

Rod Adams wondered what would happen to `study`. Because I never did it
in high school or college, I doubt I will begin now. Other people seem
to think it would be easier to leave it as a no-op in case we want to do
it eventually.

#### [Some Ado About Nothing](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/a1a5bdbf912fd91a/8d1aef1de9edad01#8d1aef1de9edad01)

Rod Adams wants a no-op function and suggested nothing. There was some
discussion about whether 1 should work. I am surprised that no one
suggested `study`.

#### [`chr` and `ord`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/ea49812733e46265/776d142ee2edcb2f#776d142ee2edcb2f)

Rod Adams thought that perhaps `chr` and `ord` have a restriction to
work only at the code point level. Larry was less sure.

### Perl 6 Compilers

Last week, I tried to link to many of the Pugs patches. I now think that
was a mistake for two reasons: first, there are a great many; and
second, many more occur off-list where I miss them. Therefore, I will
not provide links for specific patches unless they pass this arbitrary
test: Are they as important as my pizza?

#### Pugs 6.0.12

Autrijus released Pugs 6.0.11 and 6.0.12. The features are plentiful and
awesome. For a more complete list (which is long) as well as daily
blow-by-blow of the Pugs development (which is fast) check out
[Autrijus's journal](http://use.perl.org/~autrijus/journal/).

-   [6.0.11](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/252e51259e2e8668/296f1effec2f7ece#296f1effec2f7ece)
-   [6.0.12](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/dfb62cfd8d7c9ae8/7701be9639425bc3#7701be9639425bc3)

#### [Helping Pugs](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/2f991178dc3f0310/39f0bee1765b05ba#39f0bee1765b05ba)

Matthew Campbell wondered how best to help Pugs. Autrijus Tang gave him
a helpful nudge.

#### [p6ify Algorithm::Dependency](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/83250035939400f5/b51d37ddbcbc4b48#b51d37ddbcbc4b48)

Adam Kennedy asked for a volunteer to translate Algorithm::Dependency to
Perl 6. Darren Duncan did it, and quickly, too.

#### [Help Pugs](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/8192eea1c2584767/db780fa372437a16#db780fa372437a16)

Anthony Kilna knew that one of the best ways to help Pugs was to write
tests, but didn't know if there was a database of tests that needed to
be written or were written. Stevan Little pointed him to the in-progress
attempt to build just such a database, and said that would be a good
place to help.

#### [Sand Traps Abound When Golfing in p6](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/f4005c8df3c892bf/a6efb74699ea57fa#a6efb74699ea57fa)

Andrew Savige (a.k.a "mad golfer") has been working at [porting a
"small" program to Perl 6](http://www.perlmonks.org/?node_id=440685).

#### [Numification of Strings](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/f4f2cedbc5b97061/eb81ac0b17fd1bd8#eb81ac0b17fd1bd8)

There was some discussion of how to numify a string. Some wanted smart
parsing, others wanted simple parsing. For a while simple was winning. I
am not sure if it won in the end though.

#### [SQL::Routine](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/6974d4cff16fb2bf/f7786d53603fc773#f7786d53603fc773)

Darren Duncan announced his intent to port SQL::Routine to Perl 6
shortly. You might be able to hold your breath.

#### [Pugs' Bugs vs. Blue's Clues](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/d579becc29dec05f/a47f1de3c76b11af#a47f1de3c76b11af)

Stevan Little compiled a list of bugs for Pugs. By the time you read
this, many will probably have been fixed.

### Parrot

I will start this part with a very large announcement. Dan has decided
to step down as Parrot's Chief Architect. Chip Salzenberg (who just
earned first name-only status) has taken up the burning
parrot...err...torch. To forestall questions/outrage/grumbling, Dan
explained that Leo did not get the position because he did not want it.
I know that I personally have learned a lot from Dan and Squawks of the
Parrot (including how to turn crystal sugar into baker's sugar), and
want to think him a great deal for the work he put into Parrot. This
means the responsibility of returning the pie to Guido now falls on
Chip's shoulders.

#### [`make install` Parrot Headers](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e0d274fbb5120b33/14e48637be806485#14e48637be806485)

Lambeck noticed that `make install` does not install Parrot's header
files. It probably should; he filed a bug.

#### [`atan2` needs `-xlibmieee` on Sun](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/f41e809121ef5335/2f7420ec96a32121#2f7420ec96a32121)

Andy Dougherty provided a patch adding appropriate hints to the Solaris
build. Leo applied it.

#### [Burning Parrot](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/4b2cc5857c50a76c/48b36b3efb9fe952#48b36b3efb9fe952)

Leo put out a request to revive the Parrot tinderboxen. Steve Peters
suggested integrating it with the current Perl smoke reporting process.
Peter Sinnot put up a server on a spare machine in the meantime.

#### [`ncurses_life`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/f3e4cb739062468c/0c3d76d031ac94de#0c3d76d031ac94de)

Uwe Voelker reported a bug in `ncurses_life`. Leo fixed it and put out a
plea for someone to update it. Matt Diephouse updated it.

#### [Refactor of `t/pmc/pmc.t` Needed](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/329dc516447d2104/eeb2c77b3ca37aeb#eeb2c77b3ca37aeb)

Leo suggested that an interested party would be able to factor the
`Perl*` tests out of `pmc.t` and into `perl.t`. Steven Schubiger
[offered to
try](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/458c7e0121e480a3/b73023e931faf731#b73023e931faf731).

#### String Tasks

Leo posted a set of tasks looking for takers with respect to string
stuff. Steven Schubiger and Aldo Calpini each stepped up to some.

-   [Initial
    Request](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/68715e4f35b78064/07b7ae78e013dbcf#07b7ae78e013dbcf)
-   [Aldo's
    Offer](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/0d7d08d47e33c546/9465b678d81a6bfd#9465b678d81a6bfd)

#### [`thr-primes.imc`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/42b4c69ce7b376e5/2b8d1ab0976fa155#2b8d1ab0976fa155)

Bernhard Schmalhofer updated `thr-primes.imc` to not use `Perl*` PMCs,
which uncovered a bug in `Undef.pmc`. Leo fixed it.

#### [Aggregate Clone vtable](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/8870881652047d2e/111693f3a2d7c6fa#111693f3a2d7c6fa)

Leo noticed that some aggregates do deep copies while others do shallow.
All should do shallow. Takers welcome.

#### `**Arrays` TODO

`Fixed*Arrays` should have a limited form of `splice` available to them.
Also, the `Resizable*Arrays` should have their allocation schemes
adapted to that of the `ResizeablePMCArray`, and `*BooleanArray` should
store just bits. Bernhard Schmalhofer offered to take on the
`*BooleanArrays`.

-   [The
    Request](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/48ad2aae2d583d4a/5b5311c4fc191ef0#5b5311c4fc191ef0)
-   [The
    Offer](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d0540dca561770d2/fb27be1eb9fa8112#fb27be1eb9fa8112)

#### [Anonymous Subclasses](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/fe09eef1be4f75fd/f05daf33ba86a454#f05daf33ba86a454)

Simon Glober discovered that anonymous subclasses were not working in
December. Leo fixed it.

#### [Perl 6 Compiler in Perl 6](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/9145d543f52f35bd/e2b62a27a803370a#e2b62a27a803370a)

Millsa Erlas hoped that writing a Perl 6 compiler in Perl 6 was still a
priority. Markus Laire pointed her to Pugs. She seemed happy.

#### [Object Internals](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e778497a56444f84/db497f0efde11445#db497f0efde11445)

Leo has been steadily hacking away at the object internals. There is now
a `get_mro` opcode.

#### [Dynclasses Failure in gcc 3.3.3](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/4af0306d5b4bdb5d/f9079cdebbfb3651#f9079cdebbfb3651)

Leo committed a workaround to a GC problem with dynamic library loading.
Eventually someone needs to implement the real solution.

#### The Many Faces of Win32

It turns out that there are several different flavors of Windows builds
with MinGW (not to mention Cygwin or MSVC). This causes pain.

-   [MinGW](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/aeaf62dbeb16f14a/9d77af5c1c99a840#9d77af5c1c99a840)
-   [Pain](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/82b2988e0777be6b/45b485d60499377c#45b485d60499377c)
-   [The Many Moods of
    MinGW](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/ea4934debf27ef24/2af4665d9f0509a6#2af4665d9f0509a6)

#### [TODO: Clean Parrot's A\*I](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/075f871cfeba125e/f7f0ae2f3d71f5c3#f7f0ae2f3d71f5c3)

Jarkko Hietaniemi posted a TODO for cleaning up both Parrot's API and
ABI. Leo agreed that it would be very nice.

#### [Calling PIR from a PMC](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/52275131d2b6ba0b/5d04a0e33841544d#5d04a0e33841544d)

William Coleda wanted to know how to call PIR code from a PMC. Jeff
Horwitz pointed him to the `Parrot_call_sub_*` API.

#### [PAST Compiler Problems](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/0377ffb9409a4db6/d87dcd5b13f79c33#d87dcd5b13f79c33)

Bernhard Schmalhofer has a program that he can make work in imc, but not
from PAST. It turns out that we don't yet have a way to pass options to
the `compile` opcode. We need that.

#### [`Makefile` Cleanup](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/c0dbe1c83c032522/82d308ca303342fb#82d308ca303342fb)

Bernhard Schmalhofer offered to clean some old imcc targets out of the
`Makefile`. Leo told him to go for it.

#### [MRO Broke Tcl](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/ffc411a054b614d6/347b5254037f240d#347b5254037f240d)

Will Coleda was sad that Leo kept breaking Tcl. Leo suggested that he
add the Tcl tests to the base `make test`. Also, there is some funniness
going on because tests fail for Leo and not Will.

#### [TODO: Add Multiple Return Values to `Parrot_call_sub`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/8e24f6db5638451b/3aedf5963bbf574a#3aedf5963bbf574a)

Matt Diephouse posted a TODO for adding the ability to access multiple
return values from C.

#### [MANIFEST Failures](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/40f344f759cb5df4/b11b606daea1abb6#b11b606daea1abb6)

Bob Rogers was seeing MANIFEST failures. It turns out that he forgot to
use the `-dP` switch with CVS. We have all done it.

#### [PASM -&gt; IMC](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/aabfb7940abc0611/e15c16162f92a6ca#e15c16162f92a6ca)

Bernhard Schmalhofer committed a few TODO tests for generating and
running PASM from Pir. Jens Rieks pointed out that this does not work
and is only a debugging aid. I don't see anything wrong with wanting it
to work, though.

#### [Segfault on `splice`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/825d0b2ee8e15d73/bd72ed3b4004ce9c#bd72ed3b4004ce9c)

Nick Glencross found a segfault when splicing an `IntList`. Jens Rieks
provided a patch that allowed Parrot to die earlier and more cleanly.
Leo fixed the problem.

#### [Documenting the MinGW build](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/c64adac9b6b4b822/dcdeb12bb567f52e#dcdeb12bb567f52e)

Fran√ßois Perrad provided a patch updating documentation for building
with MinGW. Warnock applies.

#### [Segfaulting md5sums](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6ef839077855a882/e90e4226ded8159f#e90e4226ded8159f)

Nick Glencross decided to check up on his md5sum library. It still
compiles, but it segfaults. Leo found and fixed the GC bug.

#### [`Parrot_Exec_OS_Command`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/9872aae4f7d39836/e4496796bc505458#e4496796bc505458)

Fran√ßois Perrad noticed that MinGW was very particular about how you
execs OS commands. He wondered if this should be fixed at the configure
layer or the `Parrot_Exec_OS_Command` layer. Dan explained that he never
intended the latter to be language independent, and that a language
independent version should go in a library.

#### [Namespaces in PIR](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/5b0867aaa2381186/2c1e5c08e857421d#2c1e5c08e857421d)

Leo posted a call for comments on PIR namespaces. Dan suggested a small
addition.

#### [Builtins](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/478fad3d3c66989b/0768c592db76d962#0768c592db76d962)

Leo committed a change moving builtins to a class namespace and provided
convenient access to them from PIR.

#### [MMD: Multi Sub Syntax](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/bb978033e3dc8b06/7e90050886739a28#7e90050886739a28)

Leo put out a call to develop a syntax for multi subs in PIR. Many
people suggested options.

#### [Returning a Variable Number of Arguments](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e6f47902d1c0e9c4/b9cf876745f5e8c8#b9cf876745f5e8c8)

Bob Rogers updated PIR code to allow returning a variable number of
arguments. Leo applied it.

### The Usual Footer

Posting via the Google Groups interface does not work. To post to any of
these mailing lists please subscribe by sending email to
`perl6-internals-subscribe@perl.org`,
`perl6-language-subscribe@perl.org`, or
`perl6-compiler-subscribe@perl.org`. If you find these summaries useful
or enjoyable, please consider contributing to the Perl Foundation to
help support the development of Perl. You might also like to send
feedback to <ubermatt@gmail.com>.

-   [The Perl Foundation](http://donate.perl-foundation.org/)
-   [Perl 6 Development site](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/)
-   [Parrot Blog aggregator](http://planet.parrotcode.org/)


