{
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "brent-michalski"
   ],
   "tags" : [],
   "categories" : "community",
   "slug" : "/pub/1999/06/yapc.html",
   "date" : "1999-06-30T00:00:00-08:00",
   "title" : "Dispatch from YAPC",
   "draft" : null,
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "description" : " Yet Another Perl Conference, also known as YAPC, wasn't just another conference, it was incredible. Kevin Lenzo YAPC was thought up and coordinated by Kevin Lenzo of Carnegie Mellon University. The idea was to have a &quot;grass roots&quot; Perl..."
}





Yet Another Perl Conference, also known as YAPC, wasn't just *another*
conference, it was incredible.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![Photo of Kevin Lenzo](/images/_pub_1999_06_yapc/kevin.jpg){width="123" height="168"}\
  *Kevin Lenzo*
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

YAPC was thought up and coordinated by Kevin Lenzo of Carnegie Mellon
University. The idea was to have a "grass roots" Perl conference that
everyone could afford. Kevin made it so affordable—just \$60 per
person—that nearly 300 people attended.

You may be asking, what kind of conference could someone possibly host
for \$60 a person? Well, Kevin did such a remarkable job that it will be
hard to top it, *ever*. Not only were there great facilities, AV
equipment, and non-stop talks and tutorials, he also managed to feed
everyone! Did it stop there? No, Kevin's Mom even made cookies for the
whole gang! By the way, thank you Mrs. Lenzo, the cookies were
excellent!!!

To me, YAPC didn't feel like just *another* conference. There weren't
thousands of people trying to cram themselves here and there, or
fighting over swag. YAPC was almost like a family reunion, it was very
cozy. Nearly all of the people who are deeply involved with the
development and support of Perl were there. I was even able to sit down
with Larry Wall and talk with him over lunch without him being mobbed by
a crowd. YAPC was also a place where you could finally put a face with a
name/handle. I finally know *who* `abigail` is! You will have to come
next year to find out for yourself...

Travel seemed to be a little bit of a problem, but of course that wasn't
Kevin's fault. There were a few cancelled flights and I heard many
stories of misdirected luggage. In fact, Larry Wall had to give his
opening speech about his home X-10 setup without any of his X-10 props,
they were somewhere in Indiana.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![Photo of Larry Wall holding up imaginary X-10 components.](/images/_pub_1999_06_yapc/larry_x10_1.jpg){width="189" height="231"}\
  *Larry Wall encouraging the audience\
  to use their imaginations*
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Although his X-10 hardware was somewhere else, Larry did have his
notebook computers with him and instead of using real X-10 components as
props, Larry made us use our imaginations, holding up imaginary X-10
components for us to see. I got the impression that at Larry's house it
can be quite noisy because he has sounds play through the P.A. system
for just about every event imaginable.

The talks and tutorials were as good at YAPC as the talks and tutorials
at any of the other big-name conferences. I think in many cases they
were better because the presenters were not paid for their talks. I felt
that this also added to the *grass-roots* feeling of the conference. The
presenters were not doing this for money, they were doing it for their
love of the Perl language and to benefit the Perl community.

Their were talks and tutorials on topics including learning Perl, the
history of Perl, Perl and XML, using CGI.pm and infobots.

Jon Orwant gave a presentation called *Rebuilding Post-Apocalyptic
Civilization with Perl*. Jon is an excellent speaker and his
presentation was hilarious. His conclusion: When the apocalypse is over,
the Perl programmers survive—of course.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![Photo of Dick Hardt ](/images/_pub_1999_06_yapc/dick_hardt_1.jpg){width="191" height="203"}\
  *Dick Hardt*
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the more crowded talks was by Dick Hardt of
[ActiveState](http://www.activestate.com). There has been a lot of buzz
because Microsoft recently announced that they were funding Perl
development for Windows through ActiveState. Some people immediately
thought that this was a bad thing and that Microsoft would somehow
"taint" Perl (pun intended). According to Dick, this is not the case. As
he pointed out, this is not the first time that Microsoft has funded
Perl development. Microsoft has been funding Perl development through
ActiveState since 1995. He assured the audience that Perl will still be
openly developed and would not have a bunch of proprietary features
thrown in. Dick also pointed out that Perl no longer has separate source
trees for Windows and Unix. Because of this single source-tree, the
ActiveState/Microsoft agreement will benefit the entire Perl community
by providing outside money to fund the continual development of Perl, he
said.

The [Perl Mongers](http://www.pm.org) were out in full force at YAPC.
YAPC was a great way to get in touch, in person, with many of the Perl
Monger group leaders. brian d foy, the founder of The Perl Mongers was
there working as many deals as he could with others in the Perl
industry. It amazes me how much business gets done in side conversations
between sessions. There was also a talk on Effective Perl Mongering
given by Adam Turoff. Adam's talk was designed to help others with their
Perl Monger groups and advocacy.

Elaine Ashton presented us with *[The Timeline of Perl and its
Culture](http://chaos.wustl.edu/perlhistory/)*. Not only was this a
great talk, but Elaine has created *the* guide to Perl history by
researching and summarizing Perl from the beginning. I truly hope that
at next year's YAPC, Elaine will present her talk again, but in a larger
time-slot. She had 45 minutes for the presentation, but really needed
about twice that long to present all of the information.

YAPC also gave many of the `#perl` IRC regulars a chance to meet
face-to-face. We even went out and took a `#perl` family picture:\
![Group photo of \#perl IRC
members](/images/_pub_1999_06_yapc/perl_1.jpg){width="403" height="276"}
Though the formal conference ended at 5:00 each day, that didn't mean
the fun had to end. Perl Mongers know how to go out and have a great
time, and that is just what they did—every night. I honestly think that
some of the best ideas in Perl have come when you start mixing alcohol
and Perl!

Kevin managed to feed all 300 of us dinner on Thursday night and on
Friday a group of Perl Mongers and a few people from [VA Linux
Systems](http://www.valinux.com) got together and had dinner. The dinner
was great, the conversation was better. It was a nice contrast to have
not only people who knew Perl, but others who were intimately involved
with Linux, another Open Source entity. VA Linux Systems were kind
enough to pick up the tab for dinner too, **thanks guys!**

![Kevin with his hands full of
cash.](/images/_pub_1999_06_yapc/kevin_money2.jpg){width="180"
height="239"}By the end of the conference, Kevin found out that they had
gone a little over the budget. Word quickly spread and people
immediately started a collection. Within 10 minutes Kevin had \$1000 in
his hands and VA Linux Systems offered to pay any extra overruns. The
Perl community amazes me by showing how quickly they can get things
done. People never once whined about the overrun, they just immediately
took it upon themselves to remedy the situation. *This is exactly why
Open Source works so well*.

Sure, there is going to be "Yet Another" YAPC next year, but there is no
way that YAPC will ever be the same. This year, it was a gathering for
those who truly love Perl. Word will spread and many others will
come—which is great and we encourage it, but the true family of YAPC was
there this year. I can see it now, in 20 years people will be claiming
that they were at YAPC 99, just like all those who *claim* they were at
Woodstock.

Kevin, you did an outstanding job this year with YAPC! You should be
very proud because you organized something that will be talked about for
a long time now. **Thank you Kevin!**

And for all of those who doubted that a *good* conference could cost a
measly \$60, see you next year!


