{
   "draft" : null,
   "slug" : "/pub/2005/04/p6pdigest/20050428",
   "tags" : [
      "compiler",
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6",
      "pugs",
      "vm-development"
   ],
   "date" : "2005-05-02T00:00:00-08:00",
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "description" : " The Perl 6 Summary for the Week Ending 2005-04-26 It's my turn again. What fun. \"What,\" I hear you all ask, \"has been going on in the crazy, mixed-up world of Perl 6 design and development?\" Read this summary...",
   "title" : "This Week in Perl 6, April 20 - 26, 2005",
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "piers-cawley"
   ]
}





### The Perl 6 Summary for the Week Ending 2005-04-26

It's my turn again. What fun.

"What," I hear you all ask, "has been going on in the crazy, mixed-up
world of Perl 6 design and development?" Read this summary and,
beginning with perl6-compiler, I shall tell you.

### This Week In perl6-compiler

#### [Refactoring *Test.pm*](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=ffec23e5c25f0424eb0e39e9005d8169@iinteractive.com)

Stevan Little had an idea while he was refactoring *Test.pm*. He
wondered whether to get rid of the various `todo_*` functions in favour
of just using a *t/force\_todo* file. This led him to wonder about doing
away with *t/force\_todo* in favour of a `force_todo()` function. He
asked for opinions before he started making the change (which isn't
exactly a refactoring).

General opinion seemed favorable, though I confess to feeling perturbed
by the proposed release trick of proclaiming all failures, whether
expected or not, to be TODOs. The current system generates an explicit
list of tests that fail on "core" systems. The proposed solution seems
to make all failures equal, so as not to catch even unexpected
"platform" failures.

#### [Weird Thing with `say ++$`](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050421083227.27464.qmail@lists.develooper.com)

What do you know, `say $i++, ++$i` behaves weirdly.

#### [Pugs 6.2.1 Released](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050423225546.GA26560@aut.dyndns.org)

Autrijus announced the availability of Pugs 6.2.1 which comes complete
with much shininess.

### This Week in perl6-language

#### [Parrot Common Lisp](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.62.0504141459030.32167@okcomputer.antiflux.org)

Cory Spencer's port of Common Lisp to Parrot received much admiration
(it has some way to go before it's *really* Common Lisp, but it's a
cracking start). Uwe Volker suggested porting Emacs to it, and Lars
Balker Rasmussen promptly accused him of being Erik Naggum.

Cory acquired (or is acquiring) a committer bit.

#### [State of the Tcl](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=4265DCD4.5060708@coleda.com)

Will Coleda gave the list a heads up on the state of ParTCL, the Parrot
TCL port. It still fails some tests, apparently because of GC issues.

A few days later, [these problems went
away](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=426D8EFD.1020201@coleda.com).
We're not quite sure how, though.

#### [`alarm()` and `later()`](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200504200620.j3K6K4T02837@thu8.leo.home)

Leo stated that Parrot provides subsecond timer resolution as well as
alarm callbacks and multiple timers. Hurrah!

#### [RFC `assign Px, Py`](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=4268AD4F.2030708@toetsch.at)

Leo posted a discussion of the semantics of `assign` and `set`, with a
proposed change to PIR syntax. Warnock applies.

#### [RFC Unary Operations](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=42691D77.6060808@toetsch.at)

In another RFC, Leo discussed changes to Parrot's unary operators and
proposed other changes.

#### [One More MMD: Assignment](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a06210215be8ed35f7f36@%5B172.24.18.155%5D)

Dan noted that he was writing a great deal of code in his `set_pmc`
vtable methods that looked very MMD-like. He suggested that adding
assignment to the list of MMD functions might be a good idea. Leo
pointed him at his assignment RFC.

#### [Fun with `morph()`](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050423220805.GQ57402@plum.flirble.org)

Nicholas Clark wondered about the responsibilities of the `morph` method
with respect to handling `PMC_struct_val`. In the subsequent discussion
it became apparent that `morph` can grow complicated. Bob Rogers
supplied a bunch of extra complications and wondered about the
feasibility of making Parrot morph-free. Leo agreed that it seemed
feasible and is probably a good idea. Another subthread made my head
hurt; I can understand this stuff much better when I sit 'round a table
with people and we have a plentiful supply of drinks, notepaper and, in
Leo's case, industrial quantities of tobacco. (Ah... YAPC::Paris!)

#### [Building An Incomplete Code Generator into Parrot](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050424011934.ey5ch49tavo08k0o@www.adampreble.com)

rocko@adampreble.com (that's the only name I have) has started work on
implementing a JIT backend for the AMD64 processor. He asked a few
questions and Leo provided answers.

#### [Calling Convention Abstraction](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=426B5794.9010101@toetsch.at)

This thread continues to rumble on. Leo said that what he wants is for
the HLL folks to create a workable scheme for abstract and extendable
calling conventions that could express all the various HLL-specific
semantics of function calling. He pointed out that unless we have this
we can forget interoperability (or at least easy interoperability).

#### [Alpha Development Box](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=17004.19419.780341.502435@rgrjr.dyndns.org)

Bob Rogers "has" an Alpha development box that open source projects can
use. He wondered if the Parrot project could make use of it, and if so
what was the best way of doing this. Some discussion occurred on the
list, but I assume (hope) more happened offline.

### Meanwhile, in perl6-language...

#### [Calling Junctions of Closures](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/6062c2be978f857c/2b9510e197f06510#2b9510e197f06510)

Brad Bowman wondered about calling junctions of closures. He guessed
that the rule is "call 'em all and return a similarly structured
junction", but wasn't sure. Thomas SandlaÃ wasn't so sure.

My head hurts.

#### [`{ => }` Autocomposition](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/28e2cc6fca25de34/8b4fdd6e574cc4f7#8b4fdd6e574cc4f7)

Autrijus asked about the following fragment:

    %ret = map { $_ => uc $_ }, split '', $text;

which give Pugs a massive headache.

From the ensuing discussion, it appears to cause Larry and Autrijus
headaches, too. Also, it turns out that Larry's Perl 5 to Perl 5
translator has both madprops and madskills. Hurrah! Darren Duncan
suggested that

    %ret = map:{ $_ => uc $_ }, split '', $text;

should serve to say that the block is a block rather than a hash
constructor. He thought that this came from one of the synopses, but
couldn't remember which.

I wonder if:

    %ret = map -> {$_ => uc $_}, split '', $text; 

wouldn't do the job. (Or did the syntax change on me when I wasn't
looking?)

#### [Embedding Languages in Perl 6](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/e853d32e4575cf8d/52ba4d2059e88f36#52ba4d2059e88f36)

BÃRTHÃZI AndrÃ¡s had some questions about introducing different parsing
rules in the middle of a Perl 6 program. Larry's answer was essentially,
"All's fair if you predeclare", but with an interesting idea about using
`` ` `` as a way of introducing a "self-terminating construct". So one
could do:

    use XML;

    $a = `<elems><elem>Content #1</elem><elem>Content #2</elem></elems>;

or

    use SQL;

    $a = `select * from table`;

Various possibilities came up, but nothing set in stone.

#### [Closure/Block/Sub Multiplier](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/0c06c8f07c23cab9/418c87f274eb32d2#418c87f274eb32d2)

Matt Creenan wondered about doing `@names = &get_next(...) XX 5;`
(which, obviously, would call `&get_next` five times and shove the
results into `@names`). Juerd pointed out some subtleties to do with
functions that return closures. Later in the thread he decided that he
controlled both the horizontal and the vertical, with particular
reference to redefining true, false, and undef.

#### [`alarm()` and `later()`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/5ef4b7c6b01cd63a/79771d86e62deab4#79771d86e62deab4)

Remember the discussion of `alarm` and `later` in perl6-internals? It
moved over to perl6-language. Larry agreed that Perl 6's time interfaces
will favor floating point time values, but he wasn't quite sure if any
of them will have the name `alarm`. Discussion ensued, both on the topic
and on matters of naming style.

#### [`$?OS` Globals, Etc.](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/80ae35425a822162/56f8e74954c602af#56f8e74954c602af)

Scott McWhirter proposed making the various `$?OS`, etc. variables into
attributes of some `GLOBAL` class. Larry thought it was a good idea, but
wasn't sure it was entirely right as proposed. This area is still under
design.

#### [Parens v. Subroutine Parameter](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/10e17e64680febd3/78fc2e5d04f78df4#78fc2e5d04f78df4)

Autrijus had a question about how function signatures and various forms
of paren magic interacted. He, Juerd, and Larry thrashed things out.

#### [`-X`s Auto-(Un)quoting](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/778dca4cf38a52d8/e4c3ebbcbd211977#e4c3ebbcbd211977)

Michele Dondi had some questions/suggestions about the various file test
operators. Larry answered and the thread spun off into a discussion of
all sorts of aspects of these handy operators. Well, that was before it
turned into a discussion of the semantics of `<.foo>`, or `^foo`, or
maybe `_foo`, or possibly `....foo`. At this point, things grew a little
heated. There's no decision yet. (Personally, I'm a fan of the scheme as
originally proposed; `.foo` calls the method foo on the current topic,
whatever that may be. If you need to hang on to old topics, give them a
name. I appear to be in something of a minority on this.)

#### [Unify `cwd`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/c1ff319f1cf023f5/0b8ed8e97e51750a#0b8ed8e97e51750a)

It turns out that the "current working directory" isn't as obvious as it
sounds. It also turns out that Larry would like to be able to pretend
that it is until it turns out not to be.

#### [Blocks, Continuations, and `eval`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/28162cd4f259743f/62bfd7a95b2ea891#62bfd7a95b2ea891)

When last we saw this thread, Larry had said that continuations would be
available in Perl for people who ask specially, but that he wouldn't
leave them lying around in the open where "some poor benighted pilgrim
might trip over them, unaware." Wolverian asked what the interface would
be. Larry thought it would probably start `use Continuations;`, or
possibly `use CONTINUATIONS;`.

The thread prompted StÃ©phane Payrard to ask about the possibility of
some of the more "out there" functional programming tricks making it
into Perl 6. Once again, all's fair if you predeclare, but it looks like
Perl 6 already has core access to some pretty "out there" stuff.

#### [Accepted Abbreviations](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/cf451fce64f5edab/3287e24605f226ee#3287e24605f226ee)

Juerd wondered if we could compile a list of standard abbreviations for
various terms so as to apply them consistently. He kicked off with a
list of his own. There was some discussion, but I somehow doubt that
people will use his list rigorously.

#### [Thunking Semantics of `:=`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/49ea270756fc9d7e/a78fa00a63a5c83a#a78fa00a63a5c83a)

Once someone starts to implement a language, you have a wonderful driver
for design decisions that need to be made and for finding ambiguities
that need to be ironed out. On this occasion, Autrijus needed some
clarification of the semantics of the binding operator, `:=`. Now we
have ironed out ambiguities and written implementations (and yes, I *do*
mean implementations.)

#### [`for all(@foo) {...}`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/7b3afb5a9c87e76c/9b7675e43936ebd9#9b7675e43936ebd9)

Brad Bowman had questions about the workings of `for all(@foo) {...}`
based on S03. It turns out that the Synopsis is wrong. Larry explained
how it really should work (which is how it already works in Pugs).

#### [Lazy Lists + Mutable Arrays + Garbage Collection](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/6fe93d9d27f26708/46b2356c2fc35b43#46b2356c2fc35b43)

Brad also had questions about the workings of lazy lists. In particular,
he wondered about treating streams as mutable arrays. Warnock applies.

#### [`map { $_ => uc $_ }, @foo` Again](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/abe0f2ac4794231e/677f8877530c2aee#677f8877530c2aee)

Autrijus proposed a cunning plan to deal with the ambiguities inherent
in:

    map { $_ => uc $_ }, @foo;

by suggesting that using a block without the comma should force the
interpretation of said block as a block rather than as a hash
constructor. Larry wasn't sure, arguing that it was best to disambiguate
with something just before or just inside the block (in the same way
that pattern modifiers now go before the pattern.)

#### [Passing Hash to a Sub Expecting Named Params](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/b510cce894d07d9c/8a5a8d51f3dc378d#8a5a8d51f3dc378d)

Carl Franks wondered if he could pass a splatted hash (`*%hash`) to a
function that expects named arguments. Answer: yep.

#### [Turning Off Warnings For a Function's Params?](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/c9a4e0927b5c253c/643d8ed5c45ed6ab#643d8ed5c45ed6ab)

David Storrs wanted to be able to selectively turn off some warnings
when he's testing. He asked how to go about doing it. Luke and Juerd
provided some answers.

#### [How do I Tie Hashes/Arrays?](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/4bf493833cdb0e0b/c6002e47cb602efa#c6002e47cb602efa)

Discussion of how to tie hashes and arrays continued.

#### [Surprising consequences](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/a6c71df5881d333e/9b3f8e517837391f#9b3f8e517837391f)

Juerd worried that code like `if($foo) { say 'foo'}` would throw syntax
errors. It turns out that one of his givens wasn't quite as given as he
thought, so it's not a syntax error.

#### [Calls and Parens](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/fde913c5d15a013c/c01f77f5caa72bf1#c01f77f5caa72bf1)

Juerd posted a set of examples of the new rules for parsing parentheses
in function calls and asked which of his assumptions were wrong. Luke
Palmer reassured him.

#### [Context and Index Expressions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_thread/thread/c96c85ea8f511acc/c1f3e4b3bd643ee9#c1f3e4b3bd643ee9)

Autrijus posted a set of examples of array indexes and asked if he had
all the contexts right. There was no answer at the time of this writing.

### Hmm...still fun. I could get used to this.

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl.

-   [The Perl Foundation](http://donate.perl-foundation.org/)
-   [Perl 6 Development site](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/)

Or, you can check out [my website](http://www.bofh.org.uk/). Maybe now
that I'm back to writing stuff I'll start updating it.

There are also [vaguely pretty
photos](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pdcawley) by me.

See you all in a fortnight.


