{
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "description" : " All- Welcome to another summary from the frog house, a house so green you can see it from outer space (according to Google Earth). Perl 6 Compiler Building Pugs Workaround Sam Vilain posted a useful workaround to the error...",
   "tags" : [
      "compiler",
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6",
      "pugs",
      "vm-development"
   ],
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "authors" : [
      "matt-fowles"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "draft" : null,
   "title" : "This Week in Perl 6, July 5-12, 2005",
   "date" : "2005-07-14T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2005/07/p6pdigest/20050714.html"
}





\
All--

Welcome to another summary from the frog house, a house so green you can
see it from outer space (according to Google Earth).

### *Perl 6 Compiler*

#### [Building Pugs Workaround](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/970364a0f2f52b9e/3d87824ffe636644#3d87824ffe636644)

Sam Vilain posted a useful workaround to the error
`` error: field `_crypt_struct' has incomplete type ``, which occurs on
some systems. Fortunately, [Salvador Ortiz Garcia found a
fix](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/e6246066a58d0751/ffcfa88d592a26c9#ffcfa88d592a26c9).

#### [Pugs, Pirate. Pirate, Pugs.](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/49f0827f81def78d/b88e8886f14b55c7#b88e8886f14b55c7)

Autrijus began plotting with the Pirate folks. Thoughts include unifying
PIL and PAST, or possibly retargeting PIL to PAST. Perhaps the result
should be a more nautical dog. Maybe schipperke.

#### [Implicit Invocants and Pain](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/cb4496b1e466142b/d6a35534fbc745aa#d6a35534fbc745aa)

Larry (as the summary will later explain) ruled that `./method` was
gone. He further ruled that ` .method ` would pitch fits at either
compile or run time if `$_ =:= $?SELF` were false. Autrijus found this
quite difficult to implement. Talk continues, and my instincts tell me
that this too will pass, although Larry assures us that it is absolutely
permanent for at least a week.

### Parrot

#### [Key Question](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/8c182587ef8cbc62/4c48cd30a6a3f878#4c48cd30a6a3f878)

Klass-Jan Stol found that using a assigning a floating point value to a
key and then using it makes Parrot segfault. Warnock applies.

#### [Parrot Copyrights](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/01fc3ff8a6203ea6/ae4374d359358914#ae4374d359358914)

Allison Randal hinted that the Perl Foundation has almost finished
hammering out some legal stuff and there will soon be sweeping changes
throughout the repository addressing copyright issues.

#### [Character Classes in Globs](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/5e4230c5bcd0fc94/0bdb158c243fa88c#0bdb158c243fa88c)

Will Coleda noted that Tcl would pass more tests if PGE supported
character classes in globs. Patrick, unable to resist the siren call of
passing tests, implemented it.

#### [Amber for Parrot](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/7f12c68f90744406/667e5992eeedcd29#667e5992eeedcd29)

Roger Browne announced that he had succeed in extracting viable DNA from
a Parrot encased in amber since the Jurassic age. Either that or he
released Amber version 0.2.2--I'm not sure which.

#### [Leo's Branch](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/fb1b9a5072fcbc55/bf163135cb4a7a27#bf163135cb4a7a27)

Leo has created a branch in SVN (*branches/leo-ctx5*) of his work
implementing the new calling conventions. This led to some discussion of
[how to deal with optional
arguments](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/621435fc758277c1/fa477ead1d6957e1#fa477ead1d6957e1).

#### [Leo's Branch Meets `mod_parrot`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/520665e89857bff8/24115e27fd5aeb37#24115e27fd5aeb37)

Jeff Horwitz posted some observations and troubles he was having with
Leo's branch of new calling conventions. Leo warned that the branch was
still young, but would gladly take test cases.

#### [Leo's Branch Meets PGE](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/3de317517c40bfa3/157132eab2cbe703#157132eab2cbe703)

After the initial discussion of optional parameters, Patrick updated the
*leo\_ctx5* branch of PGE to the new calling conventions. All tests
pass.

#### [Get Onto the Bus](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/4fe4d8d6b23aec8e/41f4834e16082655#41f4834e16082655)

Matt Diephouse found a Bus Error when running
*languages/tcl/examples/bench.tcl*. Warnock applies.

#### [MinGW Patch Resurrection](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/51ac75d80345b160/99254fc869fb1f97#99254fc869fb1f97)

Fran√ßois Perrad resurrected a patch from mid-June with a set of action
items. Warnock applies.

#### [Scared Parrots Like Scheme](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e7f319f6edcee5fe/88e0bd3eb7606a57#88e0bd3eb7606a57)

Joh Lenz posted an announcement that he had an alpha version of Chicken
(a Scheme to C compiler) backending to Parrot. Leo provided answers to
some of his questions.

#### [Bytecode Vs. PMCs](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/64ebf15daf416f4a/224e3552a6a356a0#224e3552a6a356a0)

Matt Diephouse posted a list of questions about the place of PMCs. Some
of the core tradeoffs include maintainability, portability,
optimization, duplicate implementations, and security.

#### [`make svnclean`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/8bd8095c14224951/4b2a7f23442595b5#4b2a7f23442595b5)

Leo pointed out that someone removed `make svnclean`, but that he found
it useful. Chip suggested renaming it `make svnclobber`, as it does more
than just clean.

#### [*pmc2c.pl* Bug](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/303a65c78710702d/d277f7d8ed2d9c1f#d277f7d8ed2d9c1f)

Nicholas Clark found a bug in the shortcut to avoid writing a PMC dump
file. Warnock applies.

#### [Define `cache`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a6ccdcd2d2f1979d/2628963df14329d6#2628963df14329d6)

Nicholas Clark suggested that it was probably not wise to `#define`
`cache`. They removed it.

#### [Parrots Getting Smarter](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/36e9e7223850dcbe/c6e71a192649f4e8#c6e71a192649f4e8)

Leo pointed out that at least one parrot understood the concept of zero,
putting it some distance ahead of Romans when it comes to math. Once the
Parrots start to grow opposable thumbs, I will welcome our new Parrot
overlords.

#### [Leo's Branch Meets Exceptions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/4762ca5b69bec1cd/e69e85ac96c3ed6f#e69e85ac96c3ed6f)

Leo posted two suggestions for how the new calling conventions could
interact with exceptions. Autrijus liked the idea of unifying exception
handlers with the rest of calls and returns.

#### [Control Flow Graph Bugs](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/7cdffa86f6f4ebb6/8ec31c6030b0950e#8ec31c6030b0950e)

Curtis Rawls noted what he thought might be a bug in the
`compute_dominators` function. Leo confirmed that it was likely a bug.
Later he posted a note saying he was working on a new implementation for
some of the CFG algorithms. He asked for a hand, but Warnock applied.
Actually, I think I have looked at that code before. I would help be
happy to take a look, Curtis.

#### [TODO: Steal Good Ideas from Dan](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/f5db2c4bec9b285f/4c502fffd9480eab#4c502fffd9480eab)

Will Coleda opened a ticket suggesting that we open tickets based on
some of Dan's latest posts to Squaks of the Parrot. Remember: "talent
imitates, but genius steals."

#### [Punie](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/fa0b911b26481df3/d3aa6dfdb0522d30#d3aa6dfdb0522d30)

Allison Randal wants to add Punie (a Perl 1 compiler) to SVN. Response
was positive.

#### [Mobilizing PM groups](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e09da82d02a0486a/7f74455bca561f06#7f74455bca561f06)

Will Coleda wondered if there had been any work mobilizing Perl Monger
groups for the good of Parrot. Maybe I should finally look up the
Cambridge or Boston PM group.

### *Perl 6 Language*

As usual in *p6l* land, there are a couple of really long threads. As
usual in *p6summarizer* land, they will get short summaries. Odd how
that happens.

#### [Conflicting Autogenerated Accessors](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/35bee7deb1a4defc/f959d1b2d0c37f34#f959d1b2d0c37f34)

Last week, Stevan Little wondered what would happen with conflicting
autogenerated accessor names. Larry said they would carp as soon as they
were discovered.

#### [DBI v2](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/d6ccf668de28e368/5556b425d916aada#5556b425d916aada)

The first really long thread has to do with the next version of DBI. I
am not really a database person, but apparently those who are have
[strong
opinions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/b8d9be2e31c02600/c43179f8586e8b72#c43179f8586e8b72).

#### [Time::Local](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/c19bea30514933f4/3b16c5e62f1cffbe#3b16c5e62f1cffbe)

The next really long thread has to do with the next version of
Time::Local. I am not really a Time person, but apparently those who are
have strong opinions.

#### [Submethods](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/7a159cc98802b975/7eb8b200aa302aac#7eb8b200aa302aac)

Stevan Little and Larry Wall talked about submethods, their purpose, and
their interaction with the metamodel. I must say that I have only
partially wrapped my head around metamodels at all.

#### [SMD Considered Harmful?](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/f81ec2a928ff59b7/c89f2f00d5c263de#c89f2f00d5c263de)

Last week, Yuval Kogman conjectured that MMD should be the one true MD,
as it allowed nifty extensibility. This week, Stuart Cook offered a sort
of compromise. I rather like Stuart's compromise.

#### [Dependency Injection](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/322560d7d27fb63c/7332b80612ba1300#7332b80612ba1300)

Piers wants to be able to have classes that inject themselves in
correctly at use time, based on what is actually used. Larry commented,
but one quote really caught my attention: "Globals are bad only if you
use them to hold non-global values." &lt;off-topic&gt;There is an
important lesson imbedded in that quote. We really should learn rules
not to follow them blindly, but so that we understand the spirit behind
them and respect that instead. Not that I have had screaming matches
with any programmers who blindly eschew globals and `goto`s without
understanding why. &lt;/off-topic&gt; That was more of a rant then just
off-topic. Oh well.

#### [`File.seek` Interface](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/ab5aff3faacb3d55/0fabc28358cb62be#0fabc28358cb62be)

Wolverian wondered what the `seek` interface would look like for
handles. Larry likes the idea of it working entirely through opaque
position objects using `` ` `` to specify units.

#### [Perl 6/Perl 5 \~ 82%](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/efafd6d6e69625ad/4006f811870dbf22#4006f811870dbf22)

Michael Hendricks noticed that (according to
[Text::TypingEffort](http://search.cpan.org/perldoc?Text::TypingEffort)).
Perl 6 requires 18 percent less effort than Perl 5. He suggests that
this is a bad thing for the community's waistline. I conjecture that
Perl developers will use the extra time they save for activities such as
running and canoeing, and as a result will paradoxically lose weight
from expending less effort at work.

#### [Creating Value Types](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/afe5ce7665d8c7cb/4d5909caa7ae0e1f#4d5909caa7ae0e1f)

Ingo Blechschmidt wondered how to create a value type. Luke Palmer
suggested using an `is value` trait. He then went on to speculate about
mutating value traits and COW semantics. Larry though that perhaps an
`is copy` trait was called for. Oooh, a preposition at the end of a
sentence; makes me want to occasionally split infinitives.

#### [OO `.isa`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/543393430f6292d0/525e5dfe05a1bd18#525e5dfe05a1bd18)

Ingo Blechschmidt viciously lied when claiming to post a "quick" `isa`
question. This quickly went the way of the meta object. I think I
mentioned my take on those earlier (powerful, but ow).

#### [Method Call on Invocant](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/93f95d3dd9c36110/cd3de4e88dc2868d#cd3de4e88dc2868d)

The last really long thread has to do with the next chapter in the
"method call on self" saga. I am a bit of a "method call on self"
person, and apparently those who are have strong opinions. It's worth
noting this time that Larry updated the current state of the world. Now
`./method` is gone and `.method` only works when `$_ =:= $?SELF`.

#### [`use` and `require` Question](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/8c1270622f08e693/aad674b8d5e852ee#aad674b8d5e852ee)

Ingo Blechschmidt wondered what `use` and `require` actually do. Gall
Yahas suggested they return the last thing in the used/required file.
Larry agreed and held that they would also return the same thing. He
also warned that `%INC` would probably work differently in Perl 6.

#### [User-Defined `infix`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/c4349076f6416aca/5a12927bc3af87d9#5a12927bc3af87d9)

Autrijus wondered if an method `infix:<===>` would need marking as
export for a script that `use`s it to get the method. Larry explained
that the method ` infix:<===>` would be available by name, but would
have to be marked as export for the syntactic sugar of `A === B` to
work.

#### [Hackathon Notes](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/c189bc6a1ff45b63/6930a91ec364db48#6930a91ec364db48)

Autrijus posted a link to his Hackathon notes. This spawned several
threads. David Storrs tried to convince people to change subject lines,
with limited success. Much of the discussion focused on MMD and how
confusing it was. Damian Conway posted his set of three rules that would
prevent AIs from harming humans and his set of eight rules that would
prevent MMDs from harming programmers, proving that MMDs are almost
three times more dangerous than AIs.

#### [Raw Binary Data](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/34204e4b08d29684/adb4216e9160ce7d#adb4216e9160ce7d)

David Formosa wanted to play with raw binary data in Perl 6. I try and
avoid raw things except sushi. Larry suggested that this would just be a
string with its maximum abstraction level set to bytes.

### The Usual Footer

To post to any of these mailing lists please subscribe by sending email
to `perl6-internals-subscribe@perl.org`,
`perl6-language-subscribe@perl.org`, or
`perl6-compiler-subscribe@perl.org`. If you find these summaries useful
or enjoyable, please consider contributing to the Perl Foundation to
help support the development of Perl. You might also like to send
feedback to

-   [The Perl Foundation](http://donate.perl-foundation.org/)
-   [Perl 6 development site](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/)
-   [Parrot blog aggregator](http://planet.parrotcode.org/)


