{
   "draft" : null,
   "tags" : [],
   "categories" : "Community",
   "image" : null,
   "date" : "2000-10-26T00:00:00-08:00",
   "authors" : [
      "nathan-torkington"
   ],
   "title" : "Last Chance to Support Damian Conway",
   "slug" : "/pub/2000/10/conway.html",
   "description" : " $16,500 pledged, another $11,000 needed to liberate Damian Conway. As reported earlier, the Yet Another Society (YAS) is putting together a grant to Monash University, Australia. The grant will fund Damian Conway's full-time work on Perl for a year....",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





\$16,500 pledged, another \$11,000 needed to liberate Damian Conway.

As reported earlier, the [Yet Another
Society](http://www.yetanother.org/) (YAS) is putting together a grant
to Monash University, Australia. The grant will fund Damian Conway's
full-time work on Perl for a year. YAS founder Kevin Lenzo said, "The
response from the Perl community has been just overwhelming."

Damian Conway, the author of many award-winning Perl Conference papers
as well as the `Quantum::Superpositions` and `Parse::RecDescent`
modules, is a professor in Monash's Computer Science department. His day
job involves administrating a degree course, teaching undergraduates,
and assisting postgraduate students with research. It doesn't include
Perl. The Perl work he has done so far has been in his spare time,
wedged around his &gt;60-hour Monash weeks.

The wider Perl community has pledged over US\$16,000 so far. That only
US\$11,000 to be raised before a matching pledge from
[BlackStar](http://www.blackstar.co.uk/), a UK-based video-retail
company, takes it up to the US\$55,000 needed. Kevin Lenzo said
"Blackstar stepped up quite early to help out. Their business benefits
from Perl in innumerable ways, and they're really being good citizens by
contibuting back this way, in a real and substantial way that will help
everyone."

Unlike the previous kinds of corporate sponsorship of Perl developers,
where O'Reilly (which runs this site) employs Larry Wall and ActiveState
employed Gurusamy Sarathy (the last pumpking), Damian would merely be
funded to work on Perl. Said Damian, "I'd be working on projects of my
own devising: Perl modules, the development of perl6, and making
presentations to any Perl Monger groups I pass on my travels, with no
other demands on my time."

However, time is running out. Damian must let Monash know by the end of
this week whether he'll be teaching next year. Says Kevin Lenzo, "This
is a new kind of community patronage -- community-funded open source
development. If this works well, we may have more ability to fund people
for core work on Perl and other projects."

To pledge money towards the grant, go to
[`registration.yapc.org`](http://registration.yapc.org/). Any sized
pledge is accepted. YAS has applied for non-profit status with the IRS,
so contributions may be tax-deductible.


