{
   "draft" : null,
   "slug" : "/pub/2004/01/p6pdigest/20040125",
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot"
   ],
   "date" : "2004-01-25T00:00:00-08:00",
   "description" : " Welcome to the first summary from my new home in Gateshead. The same old wibble, with a different view from its window and fewer trips to London. Right, time to see what's been going on in perl6-internals this week....",
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "title" : "This week on Perl 6, week ending 2004-01-25",
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "piers-cawley"
   ]
}





Welcome to the first summary from my new home in Gateshead. The same old
wibble, with a different view from its window and fewer trips to London.
Right, time to see what's been going on in perl6-internals this week.

#### [Global labels in IMCC]{#Global_labels_in_IMCC}

The cryptically named TOGoS wondered how to get the address of a label
in a different IMCC compilation unit. According to Dan there's no way to
do that, and you didn't want to do that anyway.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040119201611.71859.qmail@web41408.mail.yahoo.com)

#### [Dan's threads proposal]{#Dan's_threads_proposal}

After a few weeks of everyone else's proposals, Dan started to outline
the design of Parrot's threading capabilities. He started by defining
his terms (a useful thing to do in a field where there seem to me
multiple competing definitions of various terms) and guaranteeing that
user code wouldn't crash the interpreter (subject to the assumption that
system level memory allocation was thread safe) before getting into the
meat of his proposal. Which you're probably best reading for yourself;
it's a long document but there's very little flab and any attempt of
mine to summarize it would probably end up being at least as long as and
a good deal less lucid than the original.

Of course, this sparked a ton of discussion, generally positive, as
people asked for various clarifications and made suggestions. Gordon
Henriksen pointed out a nasty race condition that means that the garbage
collector can't be made as thread safe as Dan had hoped.

Summarizer Barbie says "Threads are hard!"

On Thursday, Dan posted a last call for comments and objections before
he went on to the detailed design. This time there were some objections,
but I don't think any of 'em are going to stop Dan.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a0601020dbc31eb8d1b67@%5B10.0.1.2%5D)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06010210bc35dbe3d5bf@%5B10.0.1.4%5D)

#### [Vtables organization]{#Vtables_organization}

Last week Dan had outlined an approach to organizing PMC vtables using a
chaining approach; this week saw the discussion of that proposal with
Benjamin K. Stuhl asking the hard questions.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=400BDD81.1060909@cornell.edu)

#### [Benchmark suite]{#Benchmark_suite}

Matt Fowles suggested that it might make sense to create a canonical
suite of benchmarks to exercise Parrot well. His idea being that, if we
have a standard suite of Parrot benchmarks, then potential performance
affecting changes could be tested against that, rather than having
custom benchmarks rolled each time. Luke Palmer pointed to
*examples/benchmarks* and noted that it's hard to create benchmarks that
test everything. However, he hoped that any good benchmark that gets
posted to the list would get added to this suite, along with some
documentation describing what is being tested.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40144AE1.9050205@softhome.net)

#### [Number formatting]{#Number_formatting}

Dan did some more designing, this time mandating that Parrot will,
eventually adopt ICU's formatting template for numeric templates but, to
start with, we'll be rolling our own. The new op will be
`format Sx, [INP]y, [SP]z`{lang="und" lang="und"}.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06010210bc31f337e755@%5B10.0.1.2%5D)

#### [Base string transforms]{#Base_string_transforms}

Dan announced that he would be adding `upcase`{lang="und" lang="und"},
`downcase`{lang="und" lang="und"}, `titlecase`{lang="und" lang="und"}
and `to_chartype`{lang="und" lang="und"} to the various chartype
vtables. He also noted that he'd like to get some alternative chartypes
and encodings into Parrot as soon as possible to make sure we can
actually handle things without having to use Unicode all the time.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06010211bc31f77ae6da@%5B10.0.1.2%5D)

#### [Calling conventions in IMCC]{#Calling_conventions_in_IMCC}

Will Coleda had some problems with IMCC's handling of the parrot calling
conventions when he found that code that worked a couple of months ago
had stopped working in the current Parrot (A month is a \*very\* long
time in Parrot development though.) The problem took a fair bit of
tracking down and I'm not entirely sure it's entirely fixed yet; Will
had reached the point where the code would compile, but it still
wouldn't actually run.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=B8548E4C-4AA8-11D8-95BB-000A95909DD0@coleda.com)

#### [Steve Fink's obnoxious test case]{#Steve_Fink's_obnoxious_test_case}

Steve Fink posted an obnoxious test case that generated memory
corruption. The test case is obnoxious because it's 56KB of IMCC source
code, and Steve had been unable to reduce it. This didn't discourage Leo
TÃ¶tsch though, who set about tracking the bug to its lair. It's not
fixed yet, but with the Patchmonster on the case it can only be a matter
of time.

There were several other GC related issues that cropped up over the
week; I wonder if they're all aspects of a single lurking bug.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040120004855.GA28881@foxglove)

#### [IMCC returning ints]{#IMCC_returning_ints}

Steve Fink also found a problem with IMCC failing to properly return
integers from unprototyped routines and posted an appropriate patch to
the test suite. It turns out that the problem is that IMCC doesn't quite
implement the full Parrot Calling Conventions, especially the return
convention, but it's getting there.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040120015843.GC27636@foxglove)

#### [The costs of sharing]{#The_costs_of_sharing}

Leo TÃ¶posted a test program and some results for timing the difference
between using shared and unshared PMCs. The shared versions are (not
surprisingly) slower than the unshared ones; the question is whether the
difference between the two can be improved. Hopefully the benchmark will
get checked into *examples/benchmarks* as suggested by Luke earlier.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=400D5BD3.1020409@toetsch.at)

#### [An array of array types]{#An_array_of_array_types}

Dan noted that we have "a pile of different array classes with fuzzy
requirements and specified behaviours which sort of inherit from each
other except when they don't." He suggested that the time had come to
work out what we actually *want* in the way of array classes, compare
our requirements with what we have, and then to do something about
making what was available match what was required. I'm not sure that the
resulting discussion has finalized the set of array types needed, but
it's getting there. (Does anyone else think 'FixedMixedArray' is awfully
clumsy as names go?).

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a0601020ebc3350821beb@%5B10.0.1.2%5D)

#### [Remember to nag Robert Spier]{#Remember_to_nag_Robert_Spier}

Robert Spier announced that repairing the web accessible TODO list was
on his personal TODO list and asked to be nagged about it periodically.

Robert, remember you need to fix the web accessible TODO list.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=m3k73mw9fa.wl_rspier@pobox.com)

#### [Churchill's parrot still swearing]{#Churchill's_parrot_still_swearing}

Effortlessly Godwinning himself, Uri Guttman pointed to a press release
which stated that Winston Churchill's parrot, Charlie, is now 104 years
old and can still be coaxed into squawking certain inflammatory remarks
which had apparently made it rather unsuitable for keeping at its
owner's pet shop due to its habit of swearing at children.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=x7d69eey3y.fsf@mail.sysarch.com)

#### [Updated documentation in Perl scripts]{#Updated_documentation_in_Perl_scripts}

Michael Scott continued his sterling work of updating and generally
improving Parrot's documentation. This week his attention fell upon: the
Perl scripts found in *build\_tools*, *classes* and *tools/dev*. Top man
that he is, he's currently working on the documentation embedded in C
code.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=051BEB2F-4B99-11D8-86A0-000A95C50226@mac.com)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a0601021fbc36e6903a5c@%5B10.0.1.4%5D)

#### [Open issue review]{#Open_issue_review}

Robert Spier (don't forget the web accessible todo list Robert) posted a
list of the 177 currently outstanding Parrot issues in the RT system and
asked for volunteers to go through them to help weed out those issues
that were no longer current. So people did. Which is nice.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=m3isj6w7c0.wl_rspier@pobox.com)

#### [How to subclass dynamic PMCs]{#How_to_subclass_dynamic_PMCs}

Michal Wallace is trying to make a dynamically loaded PMC that
subclasses another dynamically loaded PMC and he can't work out how to
do it. Leo TÃ¶tsch had the answer.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=Pine.LNX.4.58.0401211335500.19552@hydrogen.sabren.com)

#### [How does Parrot handle High Level Language eval]{#How_does_Parrot_handle_High_Level_Language_eval}

Nigel Sandever wondered how Parrot would handle `eval`{lang="und"
lang="und"} opcodes for multiple different languages. Leo pointed him at
the `compile`{lang="und" lang="und"} op, which (while it isn't fully
implemented yet) will address this issue. Dan noted that it's currently
working for PIR and PASM code but that it should be able to work
eventually with any compiler that generates standard bytecode.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=1103_1074823506@nntp.perl.org)

#### [Signals and events]{#Signals_and_events}

Leo is working on turning OS level signals into Parrot level events, and
he's not having an easy time of it. He posted a summary of the issues
and asked for comments. Discussion continues.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=4010EB5B.1040608@toetsch.at)

#### [Threading again]{#Threading_again}

Gordon Henriksen worries that Parrot's current architecture is actively
thread hostile. He also accepted that trying to change it now wasn't
really possible. So he outlined various ways in which the need for
locking could be reduced, which should help speed things up. The big
problem, as Gordon sees it, is that so many Parrot data structures are
mutable, and mutable data structures require locks. And having PMCs that
can morph from one type to another is... well, Gordon claims that
`morph`{lang="und" lang="und"} must die, though he later modified this
claim. He and Leo batted this back and forth for a while; I'm not sure
either side is convinced.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=8A1B28F4-4E28-11D8-85AB-000502994722@mac.com)

#### [Embedding vs. extending interface types]{#Embedding_vs._extending_interface_types}

Mattia Barbon noted that the embedding and extending interfaces were
still using different names for `Parrot_Interp`{lang="und" lang="und"}
and `Parrot_INTERP`{lang="und" lang="und"}. He wondered which was
correct. It turns out that nobody's quite sure, but the person who can
make the decision -- Dan -- was en route to Copenhagen when this came
up, so there's no answer yet.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=Mahogany-0.66.0-920-20040124-172842.00@rbnet.it)

### [Meanwhile in perl6-language]{#Meanwhile_in_perl6-language}

#### [Semantics of Vector operations]{#Semantics_of_Vector_operations}

Determined to test everyone's Unicode readiness, Luke Palmer kicked off
a discussion of the semantics of `[1,2,3] Â»+Â« [4,5,6]`{lang="und"
lang="und"}. At first glance it looks like the result should be
`[5,7,9]`{lang="und" lang="und"}, but Luke argued that actually, the
code was trying to add two lists, each containing a single scalar, that
just happened to be listrefs. Larry pointed out that "Doing what you
expect at first glance is also called 'not violating the principle of
least surprise'", before going on to surprise us all with 'lopsided'
vector ops, which would allow the programmer to specify when a value was
expected to be treated as a scalar:

        $a   Â»+Â« $b     # Treat $a and $b as lists
        $x    +Â« $y     # Treat $x as a scalar and $b as a list
              -Â« @bar   # Return a list of every element of @bar, negated
        @foo Â»+  @bar   # Add the length of @bar to every element of @foo

Then he scared me with `@foo Â»+= @foo`{lang="und" lang="und"}. He noted
that it might take some getting used to, but that it helped if you
pronounce `Â»`{lang="und" lang="und"} and `Â«`{lang="und" lang="und"} as
'each'. Austin Hastings didn't like it (from a syntax highlighting point
of view), but he appeared to be outvoted. Larry pointed out that
`Â«Â»`{lang="und" lang="und"} etc were the least of a syntax highlighters
worries given that any `use`{lang="und" lang="und"}, `eval`{lang="und"
lang="und"} or operator declaration had the potential to morph any
subsequent syntax. Piers Cawley thought that truly accurate syntax
highlighting would have to be done in an image based IDE implemented in
Perl because such an editor would always know what rules were in scope
for a given chunk of code. A. Pagaltzis thought that this would
definitely increment the Smalltalkometer for Perl 6.

As discussion and exploration of this idea continued it became apparent
that people seem to like this particular weirding of the language, and
it certainly allows the programmer to disambiguate things rather neatly.
Luke even pointed out that this new approach allows for calling a method
on a list of values: `@list Â».method`{lang="und" lang="und"}, and to
call a list of methods on a value: `$value.Â« @methods`{lang="und"
lang="und"}.

Then the fun began. The issue is that `Â»`{lang="und" lang="und"} and
`Â«`{lang="und" lang="und"} can also be written `<<`{lang="und"
lang="und"} and `>>`{lang="und" lang="und"} (but your POD processor
hates you for it). This leads to ambiguities like `>>+<<=<<`{lang="und"
lang="und"} (which are even harder to type in a Pod escape) which can be
parsed as `Â»+<<=Â«`{lang="und" lang="und"} or `Â»+Â«=Â«`{lang="und"
lang="und"}. Larry wondered if the problem arose because of trying to
make the `<lt`{lang="und" lang="und"} and `>>`{lang="und" lang="und"}
alternatives look too similar to the Unicode glyphs.

You know, looking at that last paragraph I can see why people think Perl
6 is horribly scary. The thing is, you're not expected to use
constructions like that in real world programs all the time; but when
you're working out what a grammar should be you *have* to think of all
the nasty edge cases to see where things break.

Anyway, such nastiness led to the possibility of introducing a
'whitespace eating' macro which would allow for the introduction of
disambiguating whitespace. The front runner for this macro is
`_`{lang="und" lang="und"}.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040120085433.GA23075@babylonia.flatirons.org)

#### [Comma operator]{#Comma_operator}

Remember a few months ago when there was some discussion of replacing
the C style comma with some other glyph? If that were done, one of the
consequences would be that

       @foo = 1,2,3;

would fill `@foo`{lang="und" lang="und"} with three elements instead of
just the one as it does in Perl 5. Joe Gottman had a few questions about
the implications of that, and wondered if Larry had actually ruled on
it. Larry ruled that list construction would continue to require
brackets (or, if you're American, parentheses) and went on to discuss
some further implications of that.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=000b01c3dfc4$bab7d620$e58f8445@carolina.rr.com)

### [Acknowledgements, Apologies, Announcements]{#Acknowledgements,_Apologies,_Announcements}

Thankfully, this section's normal service is resumed this week. The only
catch is, I can't think of anything to say.

However, if you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please
consider contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the
development of Perl. You might also like to send me feedback at
[p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk](TODO), or drop by my website (New! Improved!
listening on port 80! Still sadly lacking in desperately new content!)

<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation

<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site

<http://www.bofh.org.uk/> -- My website, "Just a Summary"


