{
   "slug" : "/pub/2002/11/p6pdigest/20021107.html",
   "date" : "2002-11-06T00:00:00-08:00",
   "title" : "This week on Perl 6 (10/28-11/03, 2002)",
   "draft" : null,
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "piers-cawley"
   ],
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot"
   ],
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "description" : " Welcome to the latest of the ongoing series of Perl 6 summaries, in which your arrogant moderator does battle with the forces of prolixity in a Brobdingnagian attempt to tame the tortuously tangled threads of Perl 6's design and...",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





Welcome to the latest of the ongoing series of Perl 6 summaries, in
which your arrogant moderator does battle with the forces of prolixity
in a Brobdingnagian attempt to tame the tortuously tangled threads of
Perl 6's design and development mailing lists. And if I keep up the
purple prose at that rate, then it'll \*still\* be clearer than the
tangle that is this week's perl6-language discussion.

However, because it's customary and because the language list scares me,
we'll start with the comparatively tame perl6-internals.

#### [Fun With File Formats]{#fun_with_file_formats}

Toward the end of last week, Rhys Weatherley had asked about being able
to insert arbitrary chunks of metadata into parrot bytecode files. Dan
ended up producing a \`draft sketch' of the bytecode generation
facilities and the ability to add arbitrary chunks of metadata was
conspicuous by its absence. People didn't seem to be happy about this,
lamenting a lack of flexibility, both in the overall file structure and
in what one could stick into the bytecode. Dan mounted a sturdy defense,
pointing out that we want \`a file format that does what we need it to
-- present executable bytecode data to the interpreter -- as fast as
possible. Everything else is secondary to that.'

Kv Org wondered whether it would be a good idea to worry about sandbox
issues in the bytecode format, but nothing came of that question. Well,
not this week anyway.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=00ab01c27cb2%24bb206300%247b01a8c0%40deepblue)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021027211330.71710.qmail%40onion.perl.org)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05111b09b9e46aae3b80%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021030221715.73307.qmail%40web13206.mail.yahoo.com)

#### [Portable Linking Issues]{#portable_linking_issues}

Andy Dougherty is having portability problems. He wants to portably
compile and link three files, and he's having problems and wondered what
the best way was to get an early test compiling properly on all
platforms. Help was supplied, the build was fixed, and the world
remained safe for democracy. (Modulo a few local difficulties.)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.SOL.4.10.10210281229360.23168-100000%40maxwell.phys.lafayette.edu)

#### [Implicit Stack Direction Probe]{#implicit_stack_direction_probe}

Meanwhile, Jason Gloudon's patch to move the stack direction probe back
to initialization time rather than compile time was offered. I'm
assuming that Nicholas Clark's suggested speedup trick from last week
was implemented as part of it, but I'm no great understander of C.

[http://rt.perl.org/rt2/Ticket/Display.html](http://rt.perl.org/rt2/Ticket/Display.html?id=18127)

#### [Of MOPS and Microops]{#of_mops_and_microops}

There's been some discussion of granting a small number of Parrot
registers 'most favored' status. The idea being that a small number of
registers would actually be held in global (possibly real register)
variables, with the rest being accessed through via indirection through
the interpreter. Apparently, the JIT core already does some optimization
along these lines, and Dan doesn't seem to be sure that doing it for the
main interpreter would actually be much of win. Discussion continues.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05111b03b9e358db9680%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D)

#### [Very Complete Lexical Scopes]{#very_complete_lexical_scopes}

Jonathan Sillito has submitted a patch that \`implements a very complete
set of lexical scope semantics.' It looks pretty cool to my untutored
eye. General response was positive, though Jürgen Bömmels did have a
query about how to create a new scope.

[http://rt.perl.org/rt2/Ticket/Display.html](http://rt.perl.org/rt2/Ticket/Display.html?id=18170)

#### [*miniparrot*, a First Attempt]{#miniparrot,_a_first_attempt}

If you've been paying attention to the Parrot build process, then you
aware that it was always a goal to use a cut-down variant of Parrot
itself to run the configuration tests. The plan is that this
*miniparrot* should be buildable with nothing more than an
ANSI-compliant C compiler. Josh Wilmes thinks we're about ready to start
building said miniparrot, and offered his first cut to the list.
Response was positive, with quibbles, which is about what one would
expect.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200211010345.gA13jUJ2005602%40galactic.hitchhiker.org)

### [Meanwhile, Over in perl6-language (or "The Horror! The Horror!")]{#meanwhile,_over_in_perl6language_(or_the_horror!_the_horror!)}

The dreaded \`Operator Reshuffle' thread continues apace -- of the 450
posts last week I'd say about 400 of 'em were discussing various
aspects. Bear in mind, too, that the path of discussion could be
described as helical (sort of like circular, but getting more and more
wound up with each go 'round). There are at least two factions involved,
roughly caricatured as \`Simon Cozens versus the rest of the world.'
Simon can be thought of as the voice of conservatism (or Reason,
depending on whether you agree with him or not), generally arguing
against stuff he considers massively ugly or confusing. Simon's allies
vary depending on which issue he's discussing and his worries include:

-   Perl 6 is going to be even harder to parse than Perl 5
-   Unicode operators in the core language are just wrong. Many people
    agree with him.
-   Superpositional operators will be too rare to justify giving them
    precious one character operators.

This is, of course, a gross simplification of what's going on in the
various operator threads, but it does cover a fair number of the issues
that are arising in the attempt to get `^` back as exclusive or (which
then frees `~` up to become string concatenate, which... ah, go read
last week's summary, I already did this...)

BTW, 'Vectorizing' is the new 'Hyperizing' (or did I do that last week?)

Here's the various threads involved in the kerfuffle, along with Michael
Lazzaro's utterly wonderful summaries of the current core operator list
as he sees it.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3DBC5347.6DB387E4%40cognitivity.com)
-- Op list, Take 3.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=C3D428ED-EABB-11D6-A0B2-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)
-- Take 4

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=43215E86-EBA5-11D6-AC84-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)
-- Take 5

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=63ED27DD-EBA5-11D6-AC84-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)
-- Take 5a

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=E3FD6D2B-EC68-11D6-B3E1-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)
-- Take 5b

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=8964D98F-EDD7-11D6-8B40-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)
-- Take 6

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=00A132CC-ECF7-11D6-9717-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)
-- Pointers to Unicode stuff

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021031111328.A6143%40rama.comp.pge.com)
-- Someone coming in late

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=847kg1ol2a.fsf%40despairon.bofh.org.uk)
-- Questioning the value of infix superpositions

#### [Smalltalk-Type Collection Classes?]{#smalltalk_type_collection_classes}

One of the subthreads of the mammoth operator thread covered whether it
might be a good idea to include a set of collection classes in the style
of the Smalltalk Collection hierarchy to the Perl 6 core dist.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021030094931.Y32444-100000%40megazone23.bigpanda.com)

#### [Persistence of superpositions]{#persistence_of_superpositions}

Buddha Buck wondered how pervasive superpositions were, and for how long
they would remain entangled. Damian thinks they should be all pervading
and fully propagating. This thread didn't really stay on topic ... .

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3DBEF820.3040502%4014850.com)

#### [Proposal: Vector Operators for Hashes]{#proposal:_vector_operators_for_hashes}

Arcadi made some proposals about how to extend the concept of vector
operators to hashes as well as lists and arrays. Discussion ensued.
People seem to like the idea of extending vector ops to cover hashes,
but weren't necessarily sure that Arcadi's approach was the right one.
'Adverbial' control of how the vector ops work was also discussed,
though Larry gave the impression that he thought this might be a
generalization ... .

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=15808.18541.314762.704302%40figaro.weizmann.ac.il)

#### [Plaintive Whine About `for` Syntax]{#plaintive_whine_about_for_syntax}

Dave Storrs really doesn't like the syntax of the \`parallel streams'
variant of `for`:

        # This iterates over @a and @b in parallel

        for @a; @b -> $x is rw; $y { $x = $y[5] }

and he offered a list of suggestions, though I think more people
disliked his alternatives (even among those who didn't like the current
syntax) than liked 'em. Damian pointed out that a little finesse with
the editor could be of some assistance:

        for @a      ; @b       
         -> $x is rw; $y { ... }

Ed Peshko wondered what happened when you had a lot of parallel streams,
and Damian obliged with:

        for  @a;  @b;  @c;  @d;  @e
         ->  $a_var1 is rw, $a_var2 is rw;
                  $b_var is rw;
                       $c_var is rw;
                            $d_var is rw;
                                 $e_var1 is rw, $e_var2 is rw 
        {
            ...
        }

But this is a somewhat pathological case. Damian also mentioned that he
and Larry had thought long and hard about whether to interleave sources
and iterators before deciding on the current syntax.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021030102958.U32444-100000%40megazone23.bigpanda.com)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3DC19847.7040100%40conway.org)

#### [Nondeterministic Algorithms, Flexops and Stuff]{#nondeterministic_algorithms,_flexops,_and_stuff}

Piers Cawley made heads hurt (his included) when he posted a question
about using superpositions (aka flexops) to implement nondeterministic
algorithms. The particular example given was an algorithm to find a path
between two nodes of an acyclic-directed graph (lifted from a text on
lisp). Jonathan Scott Duff thought the idea was 'neat.' For an encore,
Piers redid the function without flexops, using a continuation-based
implementation of `choose` and `fail` (which hurts my head more than the
superposition-based version, frankly).

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=84hef4j96p.fsf%40despairon.bofh.org.uk)

#### [Primitive Boolean Type?]{#primitive_boolean_type}

Michael Lazzaro asked a tricky question: Can a `bit` be undefined? If
so, then it leads to the somewhat counterintuitive assumption that one
would need two bits to store a single \`bit.' Which is certainly odd.
However, it turns out that native types like `bit`, `int`, cannot be
undefined; so that's all right. This then branched off into a discussion
of whether Perl 6 would have an explicit Boolean type. It won't. Unless
Larry changes his mind.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=31FAE3A3-ED22-11D6-8C8F-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)

#### [Labeled If Blocks]{#labelled_if_blocks}

Last week, Steve Canfield wondered whether Perl 6 would have labeled if
blocks, which would allow one to jump out of arbitrary levels of nested
ifs. It seems the answer is \`no,' but this led to a discussion of
possible control statements that affect the flow of control in different
sorts of blocks (subs, conditionals, loops, etc.). It's looking like we
may end up with a `leave` statement. The other possibility would be to
make return a method, allowing one to do:

        Loop.return($x)

or whatever.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0210280903190.15960-100000%40london.wall.org)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0210281614510.18296-100000%40london.wall.org)

### [In Brief]{#in_brief}

There was some discussion on the internals list about what functions
need to have an interpreter argument. The basic rule appears to be: \`If
it's going to allocate memory, it needs an interpreter.'

Leopold Toetsch has rejigged the startup procedure so that we will
always have a valid interpreter, making patches like the one that
allowed for a NULL interpreter in `sprintf` unnecessary.

Discussion of the Parrot Copyright/License changes was subdued,
bordering on the nonexistent. Let's hope it stays as smooth.

Leo Toetsch has been doing various refactorings of Parrot ops.

There was discussion about how to generate the MD5 hashes for Parrot
bytecode \`fingerprints.' The catch is that the Perl module
**Digest::MD5** isn't guaranteed to be available on all Perl
installations ... .

Josh Wilmes did a massive 'indentation cleanup' patch (2000+ line
patch).

Allison Randal has a fascinating article all about Perl 6 topics and
topicalizers at
[http://www.perl.com/pub/a/2002/10/30/topic.html](/pub/a/2002/10/30/topic.html),
which is well worth the read.

Paul Johnson had some thoughts about using properties on statements and
the like as a way of providing metadata to things like code-coverage
tools.

### [Who's Who in Perl 6?]{#who's_who_in_perl_6}

**[Who are you?]{#item_who_are_you%3f}**\
:   Mike Lazzaro. My wife and I own a company called Cognitivity
    (http://www.cognitivity.com/) in Burbank, California. We met at
    Caltech, in Pasadena. We use Perl5 for our commercial e-learning
    software (online, customizable corporate training software). This is
    the first company we actually own, after working as
    consultants/contractors/employees for years at other places. It's
    great.

**[What do you do for/with Perl 6?]{#item_what_do_you_do_for%2fwith_perl_6%3f}**\
:   Originally, I just wanted to document Perl6's OO behaviours, but I
    soon found that to be impossible without documenting everything else
    first, so that's what I'm doing. I'm going piece-by-piece through
    all the early Apocalypses, attempting to fill in all the details and
    implications, which I am writing up in book-like form. As I get them
    done, I'll post them for review and feedback -- but before that,
    I'll have a lot of little questions and inconsistencies that I need
    to pin down.
:   My feeling is, because I'm \*not\* on the design team, and I
    \*don't\* know all the thinking on how and why things are decided,
    I'm a good test person to write newbie-level documentation. If you
    can explain it to me, that's a pretty good indication that you and I
    can explain it to someone else. I think the disconnection between
    designer and documenter will be important, in this case, because we
    want Perl6 to be heavily adopted by mere mortals, not just experts.

**[Where are you coming from?]{#item_where_are_you_coming_from%3f}**\
:   I've been using Perl since the 4 to 5 migration. Before that, I was
    mainly a C/C++ person. Before that, assembler. Perl5 is the best
    language I've ever used, but lately it's had some enterprise-level
    scalability problems that I need to solve, if I'm going to keep
    using it. Hence, I'm helping with Perl6.

**[When do you think Perl 6 will be released?]{#item_when_do_you_think_perl_6_will_be_released%3f}**\
:   Sooner than people think ... maybe a robust alpha within six months,
    I bet. People are worried about the length of time it's taking to
    get through the initial decisions, but most of the hard ones have
    already been done. It's going to pick up dramatically after the next
    two or three Apocalypses.

**[Why are you doing this?]{#item_why_are_you_doing_this%3f}**\
:   Because I've had to work in five different languages over the past
    few years, and they all suck, each in their own special way.
    Horribly. If I'm going to continue programming as a career, I want
    to work in a language that, as much as possible, takes the grunt
    work out. I don't like re-solving the same design patterns umpteen
    times. That's something a computer should do for me.
:   Why am I volunteering for documentation? Dunno, seemed like that
    effort was falling behind, since everyone keeps asking the same
    questions, over and over (like me, for example). And I can type
    fast. And I've got lots of experience at herding cats, which can't
    hurt ... .

**[You have five words. Describe yourself.]{#item_you_have_5_words%2e_describe_yourself%2e}**\
:   Programmer. Manager. Writer. Optimist. Cynic.

**[Do you have anything to declare?]{#item_do_you_have_anything_to_declare%3f}**\
:   I've grown to hate most technical terms, because nobody uses them to
    mean the same way. So I have an allergic reaction to descriptions
    that use a lot of big words to explain something that should be Much
    More Obvious. You'll find I post a lot of "please clarify" messages,
    to try to beat that out of people. :-) It doesn't *always* mean I'm
    dense, though sometimes it does. Sometimes it means "No -- really.
    Is that your final answer?"

### [Acknowledgements, Requests and the Third Thing.]{#acknowledgements,_requests_and_the_third_thing.}

This summary was once again brought to you from the comfort and security
of a GNER Express train running between Newark and London, and from the
greater comfort and security of my armchair at home. Production was
abetted by industrial quantities of site tea (in the case of GNER) and
Earl Grey China Moon tea (in the armchair).

Proofreading was mostly done by Piers Cawley, so you can blame him if
there are any outrageous typos.

And, as the postamble usually goes, if you didn't like this summary,
then what are you doing still reading it? If you did like it, then
please consider one or both of the following options:

-   Send money to the Perl Foundation at
    <http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> and help support the ongoing
    development of Perl 6.
-   Send feedback, flames, money and/or a tenchi-masa goban with a set
    of thickish yuki grade shell and slate stones in Shimakuwa bowls to
    *<mailto:pdcawley@bofh.org.uk>*.

The fee paid for publication of these summaries on perl.com is paid
directly to the Perl Foundation.


