{
   "title" : "This Fortnight in Perl 6, November 16-30 2004",
   "date" : "2004-12-02T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2004/12/p6pdigest/20041202.html",
   "draft" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "matt-fowles"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "tags" : [
      "compiler",
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6"
   ],
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "description" : " All~ Welcome to yet another summary. Although Aliya is present for this summary, I think the unnamed gecko with its tongue out will be the one who is helping to bring it to you, aided of course by Nicola...",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





All\~

Welcome to yet another summary. Although Aliya is present for this
summary, I think the unnamed gecko with its tongue out will be the one
who is helping to bring it to you, aided of course by Nicola Conte and
Massive Attack. Rather than try to do something witty about the strange
music I am listening to, or the stuffed animals who are assisting me, I
will start this summary off with an entirely self-serving request.
&lt;abuse&gt;A while ago I saw the quote, "Computer Science is merely
the post-Turing Decline of Formal Systems Theory," without an
attribution. I have tried to find an attribution for it, but have been
unable to find one. If any of you know it, that information would be
appreciated.&lt;/abuse&gt;

Without too much further ado, I give you Perl 6 Language.

### Perl 6 Language

#### [Return Values from a Substitution](http://xrl.us/d4hg)

Nicholas Clark wondered what kind of return value the `s///` operator
would return. Larry provided the answer: a match object that does
wicked, smart things based on context (Boston is getting to me).

#### [Deep Operators](http://xrl.us/d4hh)

Matthew Walton wondered about deep operators and return types. No answer
yet, but it is still a little early to call in the awesome forces of
Warnock.

### Perl 6 Compiler

The race between Google and the compiler is over and Google loses.
Badly. While, alas, I do not have a pretty interface, you all have links
from [nntp.perl.org](http://www.nntp.perl.org/), plus a nifty infant
grammar engine to torture.

#### Parrot Grammar Engine

Patrick R. Michaud (forever after known as Patrick) released a first
version of the Perl 6 Grammar Engine (P6GE). Sometime later, he renamed
it the Parrot Grammar Engine, as it will be standard in Parrot and PGE
sounds better. He asked for people to poke and prod it. Many people did,
with quite some glee. Some work has been done adding it to the Parrot
build and making it use Parrot's Configure/make system, as well as some
cross-platform cleanups. Patrick also put out a request for tests and
explained the basic framework already in place. He also explained his
short term plans.

-   [Initial release](http://xrl.us/d4hi)
-   [Cross-platform happiness](http://xrl.us/d4hj)
-   [Test explanation](http://xrl.us/d4hk)
-   [Plans](http://xrl.us/d4hm)
-   [The great renaming](http://xrl.us/d4hn)

#### [Synopses and Apocalypses](http://xrl.us/d4ho)

Larry has managed to persuade [dev.perl.org](http://dev.perl.org/) to
host the latest and most up-to-date versions of the Synopses. Consider
the former link deprecated. Larry also mentioned that this should
probably wait a little while before it hits Slashdot. Dan put a
desperate plea not to also, as "I feel obligated to actually \*read\*
the comments on Parrot and Perl 6 stories on Slashdot, at 0."

### Parrot Internals

Having fought my way through the lack of Google, I can now return to its
calm, warm tones and convenient threading.

#### RT Data Extraction

Will Coleda pointed out that he has the mystical power to extract and
summarize data from RT automatically. Then he asked for suggestions
about how to use this power for good or for awesome.

-   [The request](http://xrl.us/d4hp)
-   [For awesome](http://xrl.us/d4hq)

#### [Locating Shared Libraries](http://xrl.us/d4hr)

Adam Warner has some trouble locating shared libraries on Debian. Leo
pointed out that Debian apparently names these libraries funny things.
The he added support for symlinks and asked Adam to provide the
appropriate symlinks.

#### [Double v. Float](http://xrl.us/d4hs)

Adam Warner played around with the Leibniz summation for pi example, but
could not get it to be more precise than 3.1431591. It turns out that
the `print` opcode was at fault and that `sprintf` worked better. In
fact, it allows you to print more precision than you actually have.
Ain't life in the floating point world a pain? We should all use
integers, where pi is exactly 3.

#### [AIX PPC JIT](http://xrl.us/d4ht)

The ongoing thread of three-letter acronyms finally seems to have run
its course, ending in a climactic upgrade to Perl 5.8.5.

#### [New Calling Scheme Proposal](http://xrl.us/d4hu)

Leo posted a new, calling scheme proposal. Dan stomped on it hard, then
posted an updated version of PPD03 (calling conventions). People spent
some time fleshing out every little corner of the new doc.

#### [Parrot BASIC and Perl.org Blacklists](http://xrl.us/d4hv)

Joshua Gatcomb kindly acted as a intermediary between the list and
Clinton A. Pierce. Apparently perl.org has blacklisted Clinton's domain
and ISP. He would be willing to resume work on it, but he would like
help, and/or to be un-blacklisted. There was no real answer to Clinton's
troubles. On a side note, my old email provider, www.softhome.net, also
occasionally gets blacklisted by perl.org (it seemed to go in fits and
starts).

#### [CVS Access for Parakeet](http://xrl.us/d4hw)

Michel Pelletier was wondering if he could have CVS access to the
Parakeet language directory now that he has a perl.org username
(michel). Dan said that he had forgotten to mention that he had put in a
request, and he would likely forget to mention when the request went
through.

#### [Return with Return Continuation](http://xrl.us/d4hx)

In the confusion of what not to change and what to change, the op to
return to the caller by invoking the current return continuation
disappeared in the shuffle. After sorting out the fact that Dan wanted
it to go in, Leo added it, naming it `returncc` for lack of anything
better.

#### [Parakeet Broken](http://xrl.us/d4hy)

Jeff Horwitz noted that Parakeet did not quite work. Leo pointed out
that Parrot had outflown Parakeet and it needed to catch up with the new
eval changes.

#### Deprecation of P0, P1, P2

Leo sent a warning to the list that, as per PDD03, access to the current
continuation and sub should only come from the `interpinfo` ops. Usage
of P0 and P1 for these things is officially deprecated and soon to be
discontinued. Also, P2 current object came along for the ride later,
which caused troubles with imcc's `self` macro. Later, he removed the
deprecated things.

-   [Initial warning](http://xrl.us/d4hz)
-   [Self stuff](http://xrl.us/d4h2)
-   [Updated warning](http://xrl.us/d4h3)
-   [The removal](http://xrl.us/d4h4)

#### [`Main` Is Just a Sub](http://xrl.us/d4h5)

Leo has coerced `main` into looking and acting exactly like any other
sub. Consistency is nice like that.

#### Continuations, Basic Blocks, and Register Allocation

The thread of the week last week continued strong into early this week,
slowly but steadily clearing up misconceptions of certain summarizers
who would like to remain anonymous. Also, later in the week, Bill
Coffman provided a summary of the problems and ideas thus far. We all
eagerly await the resolution.

-   [The monster thread itself](http://xrl.us/d4h6)
-   [Bill's summary](http://xrl.us/d4h7)

#### [m4 0.0.10](http://xrl.us/d4h8)

To keep up with the aforementioned `eval` changes, Bernhard Schmalhofer
provided some m4 improvements.

#### [Lightweight Calling Conventions](http://xrl.us/d4h9)

Dan, Leo, and Patrick had an interesting discussion about the speed of
various calling conventions. While `BSR`/`RET` beats continuations,
continuations with tail-call optimization beat `BSR`/`RET`; however,
`BSR`/`RET` with tail-call optimization edges out continuations. In the
end, the PGE will be agnostic to calling conventions so as to provide a
real-world test for benchmarking. Either way, fear the Big Sweaty
Russian (ask Mike Z if you want to know ;-).

#### [NCI Signature Correction](http://xrl.us/d4ia)

Last week I incorrectly claimed that the `d` signature allowed access to
a raw buffer. I was wrong, it was `b`. Thanks for the catch, Bernhard.

#### [Void Functions Don't Return Things](http://xrl.us/d4ib)

Andy Dougherty noticed that *matchrange.pmc* attempted to return
something from a void function. He supplied a patch, but there seems to
be no response....

#### [`Perl6 --tree`](http://xrl.us/d4ic)

Gerd Pokorra submitted a patch to fix a problem with `perl6 --tree`.
Warnock applies.

#### `ResizableIntegerArray` Needs Soda

Patrick requested that someone provide the wonderfully amazing
`ResizableIntegerArray` `pop`. Once that is done, PGE should switch from
using a `PerlArray` to a `ResizableIntegerArray`. Patches welcome.

-   [Pop request](http://xrl.us/d4id)
-   [Conversion request](http://xrl.us/d4ie)

#### [No perldoc =&gt; WARNING](http://xrl.us/d4if)

James deBoer provided the previously requested patch for doing the right
thing when there is no `perldoc` present. Leo applied it.

#### [Broken Benchmarks](http://xrl.us/d4ig)

The great thing about breaking benchmarks is that if you do it right,
your execution time goes from a big number to nearly nothing. It
provides one hell of a speed up. Unfortunately, it also means they don't
work. Alas, such is life. Fortunately Leo provided an explanation, if
not a fix.

#### [MMD with Native Types](http://xrl.us/d4ih)

Leo voiced his confusion about `MMD_ADD_INT`. When Leo is confused, I
worry.

#### Polymorphic Inline Caches (PICs)

Leo posted some interesting stuff about PICs and provided some
preliminary benchmarks. He also provided a link to the article from
which he drew the idea.

-   [Leo's post](http://xrl.us/d4ii)
-   [The paper](http://xrl.us/d4ij)

#### [Mac OS X.2 Failures](http://xrl.us/d4ik)

Klaas-Jan Stol noticed that *pmc2c2.pl* failed on his 10.2 installation.
He asked for help, but no one has responded yet.

#### [Inconsistent opcode Names](http://xrl.us/d4im)

William Coleda noticed that we did not consistently use\_underscores or
pushwordstogether. Everyone agrees this is a problem, so we are probably
just waiting on a brave soul who can make the necessary sweeping change.
I think that underscores\_won\_out.

#### [Tcl Supports Lists](http://xrl.us/d4in)

Will Coleda added basic list support to Tcl. Then he threatened to do
more with it. I, for one, welcome our new list overlords.

#### [Build Problems on PPC Linux](http://xrl.us/d4io)

chromatic (whose name Google rudely capitalizes) had some trouble
building Parrot on PPC Linux. No resolution yet.

#### New TODO Items

Will Coleda added some new TODO items.

-   [Finish split opcode](http://xrl.us/d4ip)
-   [Remove Perl dependency on split](http://xrl.us/d4iq)
-   [Add split to Tcl](http://xrl.us/d4ir)
-   [Add \\u support to Tcl](http://xrl.us/d4is)

#### [Intellectual Property](http://xrl.us/d4it)

Tim Brunce asked how Parrot was handling IP concerns. Dan told him that
we have lawyers working up "Real Paperwork" even as we speak. In the
meantime, it is mostly an honor system.

#### [1 - 2 == BOOM](http://xrl.us/d4iu)

Will Coleda found a bug in MMD. Leo took responsibility and submitted a
fix.

#### [Escaping Strings](http://xrl.us/d4iv)

Patrick wondered if some code sitting around would properly escape a
string into a nice, clean form. The answer is yes, use `Data::Escape`.

#### [Bug in Method Calling with nonconst Keys](http://xrl.us/d4iw)

Luke Palmer found this bug. Leo fixed it.

#### [Underscores on Subs](http://xrl.us/d4ix)

Luke Palmer wondered if subs still had to have `_` before their names.
Leo provided the answer: no, and the docs are out of date.

#### [Silent Effect of opcodes](http://xrl.us/d4iy)

Leo noted that opcodes with silent effects need a little more special
treatment. This morphed into a conversation about the continuation
troubles that have been haunting us all and exceptions, too.

#### [IMCC Tracing, Leaving Subs](http://xrl.us/d4iz)

Will Coleda asked if it would be possible to indicate what route Parrot
would return to after a `returncc` opcode. Leo liked the idea and put in
a quick hack for it, which needs cleanup.

#### [Threads, Events, and Win32 (Oh My!)](http://xrl.us/d4i2)

Gabe Schaffer continued to explore the problems and approaches to
portable threading with Leo's help. Best of luck, guys.

#### [IMCC Register Mapping](http://xrl.us/d4i3)

Will Coleda noticed a possible optimization with register mapping. Leo
said that it was not that simple, but it would be implemented at some
point in the new register allocator.

#### Exceptions

Exceptions hurt my head, especially Dan's description of them. Thus I
will just leave you to read it for yourself, so your head can hurt, too.

-   [Dan's initial post](http://xrl.us/d4i4)
-   [Will's troubles](http://xrl.us/d4i5)

#### [Missing Makefile Dependencies](http://xrl.us/d4i6)

Leo noticed that the *Makefile* is not quite right about its
dependencies. This frequently recurs.

#### [JITted vtables for Sparc](http://xrl.us/d4i7)

Stéphane Peiry provided some more JIT support for the Sparc. Leo applied
the patch.

#### [PGE Namespaces and Names](http://xrl.us/d4i8)

Will Coleda, Luke Palmer, Jerome Quelin, and Patrick all worked to clean
up PGE to have its own namespace and consistent naming.

#### [`Parrot_compreg` Signature](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a176fb26410228fc/a12ef10c010ecaec?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D30%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#a12ef10c010ecaec)

Bernhard Schmalhofer noticed that `Parrot_compreg` had a different
signature than documented, so he submitted a patch to fix it. Leo
applied it.

#### [opcode Numbering](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/0dcb4c68cab4a7ac/3de333c4d23c4ca9?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D30%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#3de333c4d23c4ca9)

Leo added a TODO ticker for opcode numbering.

#### Tests Pass, but Create Core Files

I reported that on my machine all of the tests claim to pass, but core
files appear in the *parrot* directory. Dan confirmed my suspicion that
this was a real problem. I tried to supply helpful information like back
trace, but Warnock applies.

-   [Initial
    message](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/74744e09d7adc092/d43f4106f2e905a5?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D30%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#d43f4106f2e905a5)
-   [Squeeky wheel gets the
    kick?](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/488e623d71b6d8ab/c909c9babac8d80f?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#c909c9babac8d80f)

#### [pcc Cleanup](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6a9d65594a45f70a/ba0ef78e52148775?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D30%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#ba0ef78e52148775)

Leo removed the recently deprecated P0, P1, P2 usage. Relatively few
tests break as a result.

#### [Namespace-Sub Invocation](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/7b48bde181d11a1a/66e7d4e7a7ab6ac2?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D30%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#66e7d4e7a7ab6ac2)

Luke Palmer wanted to know if there is syntax for calling subs from a
particular namespace. Leo provided the answer: call it as a method on
the namespace PMC.

#### [Reserved Words Annoy](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/45872280dbf8ab9d/d8b7d8f26eccaf63?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D30%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#d8b7d8f26eccaf63)

Luke Palmer wondered if he could define a `.sub "new"` to get around
reserved word problems. Leo added the support, but warned him not to use
"spaces or such."

#### Lexicals, Continuations, Register Allocation, and ASCII Art

This thread (and the ones that preceded it) have made me wish that Gmail
and Google Groups had a fixed-width font option. Sadly, this summary
will probably not get me it, as it did not get me p6c either. Ah well.
The problems associated with lexicals and continuations churned. There
was a plea for guidance from Dan. Hopefully he will guide us shortly.

-   [One thread about
    it](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/3a61fe5e97d17389/5d407a49e35702c0?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D30%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#5d407a49e35702c0)
-   [And another (with
    plea)](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/214157bf29879710/c57b4637509a41ab?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#c57b4637509a41ab)

#### [Old Parrot Question](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/88235ce751128b01/33970bc9a90a06cb?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D30%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#33970bc9a90a06cb)

Bloves had a question about *assemble.pl* in the Parrot 0.0.1 source.
Warnock applies.

#### [Parrot on Linux PPC Build](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/3cf8e317d26e3bcf/20e082437de64106?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D30%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#20e082437de64106)

chromatic managed to track down some of the PPC build issues for Linux.
Leo wondered where all of the config hackers went. I think Leo wants
someone to fix it.

#### [Preprocessor Problems](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/3f850bb15ad00090/8c9270a316157318?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#8c9270a316157318%0A--%20initial%20message)

Flavio S. Glock noted that the preprocessor did undesirable things. Leo
suddenly realized that it was woefully out-of-date and need major
fixing/disabling. Flavio submitted a small patch for it, but Leo pointed
out that this was not enough to actually fix the preprocessor.

#### [New `push_eh` opcode](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/1c4cc50f5124ecdb/077a2262017fee69?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#077a2262017fee69)

Leo added a new `push_eh` opcode and deprecated the old `set_eh`.

#### TODO and RT Wrangling

Will Coleda continued his stellar work managing the RT queues. Brent
"Dax" Royal-Gordon patched the first one.

-   [Remove Perl\* PMCs
    (done)](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/038a16c644cd85d9/b11b6c59dab91269?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#b11b6c59dab91269)
-   [The
    patch](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/f9e3c119a6d96c92/4c254d61bdf2ffbf?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#4c254d61bdf2ffbf)
-   [Make Perl\* PMCs
    dynamic](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/55d6877477bd2ce3/7fb65a1c7cd9a169?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#7fb65a1c7cd9a169)
-   [IMCC documentation
    needed](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d968cfbd529970bb/ef890a6842435659?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#ef890a6842435659)

#### PMC Does "hash|array|monkey"

Will Coleda added a ticket for the `does` functionality. He promptly
closed it when Leo pointed out that it already existed in the form of
the `does` op. So Will up and started using it.

-   [Initial
    request](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/0d7df7f4cdba0821/fcf7be31e8c07a97?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#fcf7be31e8c07a97)
-   [Tcl takes
    advantage](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/20829a4743413438/7133a04b64d46880?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#7133a04b64d46880)

#### [Strings Are In](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/32e8b813ae9d638b/d413362b93c0b8d4?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#d413362b93c0b8d4)

Dan announced that the last of his string stuff was checked in and he
would like brave souls to help him merge it back into the tree.

#### [Language TODO Tests](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/b278ec3c2df48ae4/f8c3302fed106b0e?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#f8c3302fed106b0e)

Will Coleda thanked Josh Wilmes for fixing the Language TODO tests.
Apparently one of Tcl's has mysteriously started working.

#### [Minesweeper Broke](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e0d155b14c769ed0/fc395ff103bccd69?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#fc395ff103bccd69)

Jens Rieks noticed that somewhere in the shuffle minesweeper broke. As a
professional minesweeper-er, this shocks and offends me. Leo offered a
pointer as to where to start looking to fix it.

#### [`@ANON` Subs](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/baf16164e0942a99/a7d9e8b2ea97a641?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#a7d9e8b2ea97a641)

Leo added some support for anonymous subroutines. People liked them and
began to use them. Luke Palmer promptly tried combining it with
`@IMMEDIATE` and began to wonder if it were immediate enough.

#### [Parrot Grammar Engine Issues](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/f9c31fa171d3a634/c18f2e2beaaedb2b?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#c18f2e2beaaedb2b)

I think that I shall continue to spell out PGE for a little while, but I
may decide to use only the acronym in some later summary without
warning, so be prepared. Oh right, the whole reason I mentioned it in
the first place ... Will Coleda pointed out a few issues, including (1)
doesn't compile by default and (2) doesn't compile at all. Nicholas
Clark fixed (2), and Patrick figured that (1) could wait until it was a
little more mature. Personally, I feel that maturity is overrated,
poo-poo head.

#### [(Java|ECMA)Script on Parrot](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/c773166b629fa6e0/635e61453b2ad086?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#635e61453b2ad086)

David "liorean" Andersson wondered if there were any projects to run
JavaScript on Parrot. While there does not appear to be, many people
think it would be a good idea and offered useful pointers.

#### [Rules Engines](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/4245c22323f10eec/fb96b1b98e28df7a?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#fb96b1b98e28df7a)

Cindi Jenkins posted a link to an interesting blog entry on rules
engines. Unfortunately, I think she posted it to Google Groups as it did
not find its way onto the list. Also, unfortunately, it is a post about
logic rules engines a la Prolog and not grammar rules. Who knows,
though, there might be some overlap....

#### PIR Examples on the Website

Herbert Snorrason noted that there were no PIR examples on the website
and opened a ticket for it. Will took a first pass at it.

-   [Original
    message](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/cc070158b58d62f9/ed6e93528eb83000?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#ed6e93528eb83000)
-   [Parrot code examples](http://www.parrotcode.org/examples/)

#### [`testj string_102` Issues](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/f431003d9429cfe2/7df630bb59973686?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#7df630bb59973686)

Luke Palmer found a subtle-looking problem in *string\_102.pasm*. Leo
couldn't reproduce it and suggested that it might be a Red Hat thing.
Peter Sinnott chimed in with a possibly unrelated failure, also on Red
Hat.

#### [Tuning and Monitoring](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/ab18b616e2a89b3b/6bedca9a038ed1d9?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#6bedca9a038ed1d9)

Matt S. posted a question about how much internal tuning and monitoring
Parrot will allow. Unfortunately, I think he posted it to Google Groups,
as it didn't show up in my inbox. I am honestly not sure how much is
available or in the works.

#### [Missing directory in *MANIFEST*](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a69db424446d8783/ff859e67ee2aa353?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#ff859e67ee2aa353)

Andy Dougherty submitted a patch fixing a missing directory in the
manifest by allowing *ops2pm.pl* to add it.

#### [Objects, Classes, Metaclasses, and Tall People's Heads](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/eb26d8206c8346d4/cddac16c4d298d65?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#cddac16c4d298d65)

Dan posted a refresher on the current state of the object system. He
then went on to explain where it was headed and conjectured that this
would be enough. Just reading his description of it hurts my head enough
that I do not wish to guess if he is right or not.

#### [`eof` opcodes](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/db77d18c6011534b/f140e6aa524b48a0?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#f140e6aa524b48a0)

Brian Wheeler wondered why there was no "eof" opcode. Leo told him that
it was a method on a PIO object. Apparently most of the IO opcodes
should actually be PIO methods. Go figure.

#### Ops to Deprecate or Not

Leo attempted to trim down the core by removing some opcode variants.
Dan did not appreciate the change and told Leo to roll it back.
Fortunately, Dan went on to explain the longer-term goal (which should
satisfy Leo).

-   [Initial
    posting](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/1c782d44bacb09d7/282ffc0fcf893f3e?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#282ffc0fcf893f3e)
-   [CVS commit
    message](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/4895a297d8442753/9f6119f5da401c99?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#9f6119f5da401c99)
-   [The
    goals](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a549937c1d815228/9ca142664145ad61?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26order%3Drecent%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#9ca142664145ad61)

### Perl 6 Language

#### [Deep Operators](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/threa%0Ad/7d839d26208ce291/5f2fea0de12b17ba?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.language%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26tsc%3D1%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#5f2fea0de12b17ba)

Last week, Matthew Walton wondered about Deep Operators and if they
would work as he expected. As I tentatively predicted, the answer came
back and was "yes." Then the thread got sidetracked with context and
Perl vs. perl vs. PERL concerns.

#### [`Gather` to Separate Bins](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/ca6052f823f3742d/87aa6adbc75cf1af?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.language%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26tsc%3D1%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#87aa6adbc75cf1af)

Dave Whipp wanted to know if he could use `gather`/`take` with multiple
bins. Michele Dondi suggested using adverbs for it. Rod Adams pointed
out that as `gather` is inherently lazy, the two-binned approach could
cause strange results (like churning for a while, filling one bin, and
trying to get an element for the other). Of course, not being able to do
it would mean possibly having to compute an expensive generator
function. This is more than necessary, unless it is memorized....

#### [&lt;&lt; In Here-Docs](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/a3dcca5308b8c1d3/7e652c58a92b8763?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.language%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26tsc%3D1%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#7e652c58a92b8763)

Thomas Seiler has decided to test my copy-paste-fu by starting a
discussion on characters that don't appear on my keyboard. His question
was if `<<END` could start a here-doc. The answer appears to be "no."

#### [`« != <<`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/257b8e0bbed541a8/ab6622fc31d918f9?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.language%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26tsc%3D1%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#ab6622fc31d918f9)

The above thread led to a discussion of the various quoting operators,
and the differences between `«» `and `<<>>`. This led to much discussion
on the finer points of `qw`, `qx`, and `qq` (among others). Juerd
suggested scrapping `qx` and `qw` in favor of `qq:x` and `qq:w`, which
Larry liked. Rod Adams suggested scrapping `<<END` in favor of
`qq:h/END/`, which I like.

#### [Unifying Namespaces](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/68898c62789633c4/46454a84a9172df0?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.language%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26tsc%3D1%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#46454a84a9172df0)

Alexey Trofimenko wondered about unifying the \$, @, and % namespaces.
Larry told him that this ship sailed long ago and that it was not
changing.

#### [Lexing/Parsing Perl6 Without Executing Code](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/a96c900343eee05a/33dac0ffef3f5412?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.language%2Fthreads%3Fstart%3D0%26tsc%3D1%26&_doneTitle=Back&&d#33dac0ffef3f5412)

Adam Kennedy wants to be able to syntax color (and possible perform
basic programmatic manipulations of Perl 6 code). Anyone who has used a
good IDE like Visual Studio, Eclipse, or IntelliJ probably understands
where he is coming from. He does not, however, want to execute arbitrary
code in the process of doing this. Much discussion ensued, but it does
not look like he will be able to do this. Quite the tragedy, but Perl is
simply too dynamic for the docile lexing of static languages.

### Perl6 Compiler

#### [Nice Work](http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl6.compiler/121)

Nick Glencross has the honor of the only message on p6c this week, but
his sentiment is shared by all. Nice work, Patrick.

### The Usual Footer

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl. You might also like to send feedback to <ubermatt@gmail.com>.

-   [The Perl Foundation](http://donate.perl-foundation.org/)
-   [Perl 6 Development site](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/)
-   [Parrot Blog aggregator](http://planet.parrotcode.org/)


