{
   "date" : "2002-01-05T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2002/01/p6pdigest/20020105",
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "title" : "This Week on Perl 6 (30 December 2001 - 5 Jan 2002)",
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot"
   ],
   "authors" : [
      "bryan-warnock"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "description" : "Notes You can subscribe to an email version of this summary by sending an empty message to perl6-digest-subscribe@netthink.co.uk. This summary, as with past summaries, can be found in here. Please send additions, submissions, corrections, kudos, and complaints to bwarnock@capita.com. For...",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "draft" : null
}





### [Notes]{#Notes}

You can subscribe to an email version of this summary by sending an
empty message to <perl6-digest-subscribe@netthink.co.uk>.

This summary, as with past summaries, can be found in
[here](http://members.home.com/bcwarno/Perl6/digests/). Please send
additions, submissions, corrections, kudos, and complaints to
<bwarnock@capita.com>.

For more information on the Perl 6 and Parrot development efforts, visit
[dev.perl.org](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/) and
[parrotcode.org](http://www.parrotcode.org/).

There were 373 messages across 112 threads, with 50 authors
contributing. Most of the messages were patches. For 2001, about 340
folks submitted over 9000 messages across 1300 or so threads.

### [Generators]{#Generators}

(8 posts) Clark C. Evans
[asked](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07228.html)
whether Parrot will support generators, a cousin to continuations. Dan
Sugalski
[says](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07241.html)
coroutines and continuations are in, but didn't really answer about
generators. (As a sidebar, the rest of the thread was an interesting
discussion about Python's recent addition of generators and [how they
work](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07246.html).)

### [Platform Fixes]{#Platform_Fixes}

Win32 has had more work done on it; in particular, the continual
makefile problems. LP64 environments, such as 64-bit Solaris and Tru64,
also received a much-needed fix, allowing them to finally work.

### [Signed vs. Unsigned]{#Signed_vs_Unsigned}

A huge signed-to-unsigned migration was finally begun. Somewhere between
the original design and the initial code, the use of an unsigned partner
to INTVAL (The Type Formerly Known As IV) was dropped. It's now been
reintroduced, and implicitly unsigned values are slowly being converted.

### [Strings]{#Strings}

There were a lot of cleanup and additions made to string support in
Parrot. There was a mild discussion on being able to
[dereference](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07307.html)
a stringified address.

### [Fixed-sized Output Records]{#Fixed_sized_Output_Records}

The language list received a
[question](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg08840.html)
from Tzadik Vanderhood, asking if a fixed-sized output record will be
allowed, in line with its input record counterpart: `$/ =\80;`.

Aaron Sherman gave a [good
response](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg08841.html).

### [Parroty Bits]{#Parroty_Bits}

The [Perl Development Grant Fund](http://donate.perl-foundation.org)
creeped up to 26%.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Bryan C. Warnock](http://members.home.com/bcwarno/Perl6/)


