{
   "title" : "Newcomer Experience in the Perl Community Survey",
   "tags" : [],
   "categories" : "Community",
   "slug" : "/pub/2012/10/newcomer-experience-in-the-perl-community-survey",
   "date" : "2012-10-15T06:00:01-08:00",
   "draft" : null,
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "image" : null,
   "description" : "Kevin Carillo asks for assistance surveying newcomers to the Perl community about their experiences, positive and otherwise.",
   "authors" : [
      "kevin-carillo"
   ]
}





I am currently running [a survey looking at the Perl
community](https://limesurvey.sim.vuw.ac.nz/index.php?sid=89971&lang=en)
specifically and I am looking for people who joined the Perl community
within the last two years. I am equally interested in hearing from
people having had either positive or negative experiences as newcomers.

Perl subcultures and newcomer experience in Perl
------------------------------------------------

The Perl community has been a growing and evolving multi-faceted entity
that is now comprised of a large number of social groups (for example,
262 Perl Mongers groups as of 10/10/12) and various sub-projects that
all have their own history and subculture.

Some projects are very newcomer conscious while others are not. Projects
may rely on different strategies and means when trying to integrate new
recruits. Younger projects like [Mojo](http://mojolicio.us/) or
[Dancer](http://perldancer.org/) may do things differently compared to
older projects such as [Catalyst](http://catalystframework.org/) or
[Moose](http://moose.perl.org/). Depending on a project's subculture,
there may be more or fewer resources dedicated to helping newcomers,
people may be more or less supportive, or people may or may not
voluntarily mentor newcomers. We could also debate about the differences
between Perl 5 and Perl 6 when dealing with newcomers.

There is then a lot of variation in the way newcomers of the overall
Perl community are handled making each person's newcomer experience
pretty unique.

Among all these different types of experience, some of them will lead
one to become a valued sustainable contributor (from the Perl community
perspective) while others may simply end up in people slowly giving up
or even running away.

This study tries to identify the important aspects of one's newcomer
experience in Perl that have a positive influence in generating "good"
contributorsâ€”"good" in terms of being good citizens for the Perl
community.

How is it going to help Perl?
-----------------------------

The data will help gain insights about the experience of newcomers
within the Perl community. In addition, it will allow to understand how
to design effective newcomer initiatives to ensure that Perl will remain
a successful and healthy community.

Where is the project going after that?
--------------------------------------

This survey is the first step of the research project as a refined
survey will be later administered to other FOSS communities at the same
time. This will allow to generate cross-community results that will be
to some extent generalizable. This research project overall aims at
helping FOSS communities to design newcomer initiatives in line with
their well-being and sustainability.

About the survey
----------------

This survey is anonymous, and no information that would identify you is
being collected. I expect the survey to take around 20 minutes of your
time.

The survey is available at
<https://limesurvey.sim.vuw.ac.nz/index.php?sid=89971&lang=en>. It will
be available until Monday, 22 October, 2012.

If you know members of the Perl community who you think would be
interested in completing it, please let them know about the survey.

I will post news about my progress with this research, and the results
on my blog at [kevincarillo.org](http://kevincarillo.org/). Don't
hesitate to contact me at <kevin.carillo@vuw.ac.nz>.


