{
   "slug" : "/pub/2002/11/p6pdigest/20021027",
   "date" : "2002-11-04T00:00:00-08:00",
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot"
   ],
   "title" : "This week on Perl 6 (10/20-27, 2002)",
   "authors" : [
      "piers-cawley"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "description" : " You may have noticed that this summary is late. Um ... [looks sheepish, shuffles feet], the dog ate my homework. I did a tiny bit of procrastination at the beginning of the week and then got totally overtaken by...",
   "draft" : null,
   "thumbnail" : null
}





You may have noticed that this summary is late. Um ... \[looks sheepish,
shuffles feet\], the dog ate my homework. I did a tiny bit of
procrastination at the beginning of the week and then got totally
overtaken by events involving failed AC adaptors and general confusion.
Sorry folks, it will probably happen again, but hopefully not in the
near future.

So, kicking off, as is customary, with perl6-internals before getting
down to attempting to summarize the monster that was perl6-language:

#### [C\# and Parrot]{#c#_and_parrot}

The dialogue with Rhys Weatherley and Gopal V from the DotGNU project
continues apace, mostly to do with clarifying what C\# needs in the way
of datatypes and the like. It appears that Leon Brocard is the go to guy
if you need to know the exact details of almost anything in a language
spec. Maybe he's just really good with Google.

Gopal V wondered whether there was someone involved in p5i who would
mind acting as a liaison with the DotGNU people and who could give them
a heads up when, for example, the packfile format changed. Leopold
Toetsch wondered what type of changes were potential C\# breakers, as
there were probably things that we thought of as \`internal' that the
C\# team could be depending on. Leo also thought that the liaison person
should probably be Dan.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021026223952.A6708%40md3.vsnl.net.in)

#### [Scratchpad Confusion]{#scratchpad_confusion}

At the end of last week, Allen Short pointed out some discrepancies
between the implementation of scratchpads and the description of them in
PDD6. John Sillito reckoned that PDD6 was waiting on a rewrite from Dan,
especially where Scratchpad PMCs were concerned as there were a couple
of different patches waiting on Dan's say so. Dan also offered some
clarification, but hasn't ruled on the Scratchpad PMCs yet.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021020.165144.233688742.washort%40twistedmatrix.com)

#### [Help! Bugs! Crawling All Over Me! OR the Road to 0.0.9]{#help!_bugs!_crawling_all_over_me!_or_the_road_to_0.0.9}

Steve Fink wants the GC bugs ironed out before he goes adding much in
the way of new features, and he wants to start putting together a 0.0.9
with working GC, too. To that end, he deliberately broke all the tests
by turning GC\_DEBUG on for tests. There's a certain amount of
cleverness involved in how he did this; read his post if you're
interested. Peter Gibbs found what he thought was a fix for a couple of
the failures and pointed to the possibility of a fundamental problem in
MultiArray as the culprit for the remaining failure. Steve applied this
patch with much rejoicing, and then came up with a trial patch that
seemed to fix the multiarray-triggered failure. This patch had not been
finalized by the end of the week.

Steve also kicked off discussion of the forthcoming 0.0.9 release, when
he posted his list of prerequisites and sparked off a decent amount of
discussion of various points. Steve's overarching goal for this release
appears to be 'bug reduction and general consolidation.'

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021021085217.GH2030%40foxglove.digital-integrity.com)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021023162722.GI2103%40foxglove.digital-integrity.com)

#### [Keyed ops, the Return.]{#keyed_ops,_the_return.}

I think it's safe to say that some people aren't entirely happy with
keyed ops as they stand now in Parrot. The week before, Leopold Toetsch
had written a proposal for keyed ops. This week, he supplied a proof of
concept patch. Jürgen Bömmels liked it but Dan took a little more
convincing. I'm not sure he is entirely convinced yet, but he's willing
to live with it.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3DB4216B.1080409%40toetsch.at)

#### [64-bit ints and Noncapable Hardware]{#64bit_ints_and_noncapable_hardware}

Dan announced that he was about to bite the bullet and declare that
INTVALS have to be 64-bit integers and wanted to know of any (plausible)
platforms that have neither native nor emulated 64-bit integers. Martin
D Kealey pointed at what sounds like a scary proposal from C99 involving
declarations and clever compilers and wondered whether it might be a way
forward for Parrot. Rhys wondered how well the idea would play with
something as dynamic as Parrot and the languages expected to run on it,
but Martin didn't seem to think it would be much of a problem.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05111b0db9da0181ab77%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D)

<http://wwwold.dkuug.dk/JTC1/SC22/WG14/docs/c9x/extended-integers/>

#### [Configuring and DOD]{#configuring_and_dod}

Erik Lechak couldn't get the latest parrot to build on WinXP. Josh
Wilmes diagnosed a problem with the way the configuration tools probed
for stack direction, and patched things so that stack direction
detection was done at runtime once more. Jason Gloudon, who had moved
the detection phase out into configuration time wasn't sure that this
was a good idea 'cos it would lead to a performance hit in the stack
walking code. Nicholas Clark, with his clever head on, came up with
three different ways of doing things at runtime without a performance
hit, and Dan blessed the third choice.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200210240323.g9O3NQN3010652%40galactic.hitchhiker.org)

#### [Execute in place?]{#execute_in_place}

Rhys Weatherley has been taking a look at our packfile format code, and
thinks it could be improved by designing the format in such a way that
it can be `mmap`ped into a block of memory and executed immediately, as
opposed to the way parrot currently does it, which involves moving stuff
around in memory before starting execution. Dan said that that's how
things were originally done, and if it wasn't still possible, then that
was a bug.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3DB927BB.8D19D9C9%40zip.com.au)

#### [Copyright Notices and License Stuff]{#copyright_notices_and_license_stuff}

Toward the end of the week, Dan announced that he was about to
straighten out the copyright and licensing situation. As a first step,
he would be marking everything in the core as Copyright YAS. It looks
like Parrot itself will be moving to an MIT-style license \`Over no
objections whatsoever from the FSF.'

If you've made any contributions to Parrot's code base, then you've
probably already been contacted, but if you haven't and have an
objection, then you should contact Dan.

Most of the discussion of this happened during the next week, and I'll
return to it in my next summary, but response was generally favorable
after some clarifications from Dan.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05111b13b9e097305b07%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D)

#### [Allow a NULL Interpreter in `sprintf` Like Functions]{#allow_a_null_interpreter_in_sprintf_like_functions}

Jürgen Bömmels sent in a patch that allowed the use of a NULL
interpreter in `sprintf` like functions. Leo Toetsch applied it, but
wondered whether it was actually the right thing. Dan seemed to think
that, in the long run, it probably wasn't and that, if something went
horribly wrong before an interpreter got properly set up, then it was
probably best to use the standard library functions.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-18097-40584.7.52416404410681%40bugs6.perl.org)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05111b23b9e1be83d6b3%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D)

#### [Draft Sketch of Bytecode Generation]{#draft_sketch_of_bytecode_generation}

Dan offered a \`*very* sketchy' draft of his thoughts on what we need
from our bytecode generation system. Initial reaction seemed positive.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05111b25b9e1ca2991c4%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D)

### [Meanwhile, in perl6-language]{#meanwhile,_in_perl6language}

#### [Won't someone *please* think of the summarizer?]{#won't_someone_please_think_of_the_summarizer}

There were about 150 messages in perl6-language this week. The \*vast\*
majority of them discussing the Perl 6 built in operator list. It all
started weeks ago, when Damian wanted `|`, `&` and
`the_as_yet_unnamed_xor_operator` as superposition generating operators.
But that meant we'd need somewhere else to put the bitwise operators.
And people like `^` as xor, but that's not likely because of hyper ops.
And *nobody* likes `_` as a concatenation operator. It's all become very
complicated.

However, in answer to a summarizer's prayer, Michael Lazzaro has taken
to posting a scorecard of his understanding of what the current list of
built in ops is. (A list of diffs between these would be interesting to
see...). Things that appear to be set in stone:

-   `~` is the new `_`, which was the new `.` and which nobody liked.
-   `~~` is the new `=~`. (Otherwise `=~` -&gt; match, and `~=` -&gt;
    string append could get somewhat confused...) `!~` stays the same.
-   `|` and `&` make `any` and `all` type superpositions, respectively.
    Damian has an article on why superpositions are such a good idea
    forthcoming for perl.com. The phrase \`in constant time' will
    probably not be used.
-   Nobody has any idea what xor will end up as.
-   Some people are worried that changing things too radically from old
    Perl/Algol type syntax will make for a harder learning curve. Other
    people tend to think that not many programmers use bitwise ops in
    Perl at the moment, so the change shouldn't matter too much.
-   It's a real shame that so many Unicode characters are so hard to
    type.

Here's a list of Michael's various opcode lists. They're usually good
entry points to the discussion. (Which is kind of fascinating...)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=7A748E43-E847-11D6-A7D4-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=F574FCCE-E86E-11D6-A7D4-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3DBC5347.6DB387E4%40cognitivity.com)

#### [Character Properties]{#character_properties}

Luke Palmer wondered whether we were planning on having properties on
individual characters on a string; something he felt was an essential
feature. There was a certain amount of debate about the use of the word
\`essential' in this context, leading Luke to give some more information
about what he was driving at before he was eventually convinced that
what he wanted was an ideal candidate for a module.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021021050943.9C0E9287%40babylonia.flatirons.org)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021021202056.DCECF289%40babylonia.flatirons.org)

#### [Perl6 Built-in Types]{#perl6_built_in_types}

Michael Lazzaro asked for a list of Perl6 built-in types and offered his
own first cut at such a list. Larry offered some corrections, but
reckoned that the list Michael had just posted was the nearest thing we
had to a definitive list.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=EF53A634-E6B1-11D6-A0A5-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)

#### [Power of Lisp Macros]{#power_of_lisp_macros}

Adriano Nagelschmidt has been reading Paul Graham's articles about Lisp
and its advantages, especially the macro system, and wanted to know
whether the macros were really as useful as Mr. Graham claimed, and
whether it was worth adding something like them to Perl. General
consensus appears to be \`\`Yes, they're really good, and yes, Perl 6
will probably have something similar.'' Larry had an interesting post on
the subject (no surprise there then...)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021023214308.GA746%40chianti)

<http://www.paulgraham.com>

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0210250839030.17544-100000%40london.wall.org)

### [In Brief]{#in_brief}

There was a minor kerfuffle early in the week when the Parrot CVS
repository ended up with the wrong permissions. Oops.

Leopold Toetsch has implemented the `splice` vtable method based on the
semantics in PDD2. This sparked a short discussion about copying vs.
cloning.

It looks like native types are going to get type numbers just like PMCs,
but native types will be negative.

Rhys Weatherley added a bunch of infix operators to IMCC's syntax.

Jürgen Bömmels added \`fingerprinting' to .PBC files. The idea being
that Parrot can fail at load time if it tries to load a .PBC file that
was generated with a different version of *core.ops*. The previous
behavior involved weird, hard-to-track-down runtime errors.

Some spam got past the perl6-internals filters. We were shocked.

Michael Lazzaro announced an updated Perl6 OO Cookbook at
<http://cog.cognitivity.com/perl6/>.

### [Who's Who in Perl 6?]{#who's_who_in_perl_6}

Apparently, nobody is this week. I appear to have run out of answer sets
for the questionnaire. If you've been mentioned in this, or any previous
summary and you've not already answered, then please drop me a line and
I'll send you the questions.

### [Acknowledgement, Apologies and All That Good Stuff]{#acknowledgement,_apologies_and_all_that_good_stuff}

This summary was once again brought to you from my office on board the
0625 from Newark to London and from my comfy chair at home. Distractions
were provided by Xmame, Perls of the North, broken AC Adaptors and my
own natural \`Procrastinate now!' instincts.

Proofreading services were provided by me. Having left it as late as I
did, I just want to get this summary out of the door before next week's
is due. So any speeling mistooks are orl myne.

And, the old refrain: If you enjoyed this summary, then please consider
one or both of the following options:

-   Send money to the Perl Foundation at
    <http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> where your money will be used
    to support the ongoing development of Perl and Perl 6.
-   Send feedback, flames and/or an original BeBox to me,
    *<mailto:pdcawley@bofh.org.uk>*.

Any fee paid for publication of these summaries on perl.com is paid
directly to the Perl Foundation.


