{
   "title" : "Microsoft to Fund Perl Development",
   "categories" : "community",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "description" : " If the good news is that the world's largest software company has recognized the value of Perl and they are willing to fund new Perl development, then you know the bad news. Microsoft has entered into a three-year agreement...",
   "authors" : [
      "dale-dougherty"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "draft" : null,
   "date" : "1999-06-09T00:00:00-08:00",
   "tags" : [
      "activestate",
      "microsoft",
      "windows"
   ],
   "slug" : "/pub/1999/06/activestate"
}





If the good news is that the world's largest software company has
recognized the value of Perl and they are willing to fund new Perl
development, then you know the bad news.

Microsoft has entered into a three-year agreement with ActiveState Tool
Corp. to fund development of Perl, most of which will be released as
open source code. The intention of the agreement is to improve Perl on
the Windows platform. ActiveState will add features previously missing
from Windows ports of Perl, such as an implementation of *fork*, as well
as full support for Unicode on Windows platforms, a key feature for
international users.

![](/images/_pub_1999_06_activestate/aslogo.gif){width="136"
height="60"}Dick Hardt of ActiveState believes that this announcement
represents a formal endorsement of Perl by Microsoft, which should help
Perl gain greater recognition. "Microsoft's main motive," he said, "is
to improve interoperability between Unix and Windows." The announcement
can also be viewed as Microsoft getting its feet wet with supporting
Open Source software on Windows. Yet Hardt knows that some are leery of
Microsoft's interest in Perl, especially in light of Sun's battle with
Microsoft over Java. He insists that the examples of Java and Perl are
very different. "We are not producing 'Microsoft Perl' under this deal,"
said Hardt. "It won't become a Microsoft product. In addition, the Unix
and Windows versions of Perl will not diverge. They will continue to be
produced from the same core source code."

Gurusamy Sarathy, one of the original developers of the Windows port of
Perl who now works for ActiveState, said that he felt comfortable with
the arrangement. "Microsoft is interested in the end result, not in
controlling the development process," he said. Hardt added that
Microsoft has been funding Perl development through ActiveState since
1995. The current agreement is a sign that the relationship has been a
good one.

According to ActiveState, the new development will applied in the
following areas: ï¿½

-   extend Perl's support for Unicode to all system calls so that Perl
    can interface with file names and environment variables as Unicode
    data.
-   provide a functionally equivalent implementation of fork, a Unix
    system call which does not exist on NT systems. ï¿½
-   improve the performance of Perlscript by saving the state of a
    compiled script for a subsequent script. This will help Perl match
    VBscript and JavaScript performance in the ASP environment.
-   add support for the new Microsoft installer, which is a requirement
    for Windows 2000 compatibility.

For more information, visit
[www.activestate.com](http://www.activestate.com/).


