{
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot"
   ],
   "title" : "This Week on Perl 6 (3 -9 Mar 2002)",
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "slug" : "/pub/2002/03/p6pdigest/20020309",
   "date" : "2002-03-12T00:00:00-08:00",
   "image" : null,
   "description" : " Notes Both the email subscription and the web archive are temporarily offline. This should be remedied shortly. In the meantime, please send additions, submissions, corrections, kudos, and complaints to bwarnock@capita.com. Perl 6 is the major redesign and rewrite of...",
   "authors" : [
      "bryan-warnock"
   ],
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "draft" : null
}





### [Notes]{#Notes}

Both the email subscription and the web archive are temporarily offline.
This should be remedied shortly. In the meantime, please send additions,
submissions, corrections, kudos, and complaints to
<bwarnock@capita.com>.

Perl 6 is the major redesign and rewrite of the Perl language. Parrot is
the virtual machine that Perl 6 (and other languages) will be written
for. For more information on the Perl 6 and Parrot development efforts,
visit [dev.perl.org](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/) and
[parrotcode.org](http://www.parrotcode.org/).

Last week was extremely light, with just 70 messages across 34 threads,
and 29 authors contributing.

### [`printf`]{#printf}

Uri Guttman
[cross-posted](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg09215.html)
a thread discussing redesigning `printf`. Since `%` will now be used for
all hash accesses, there's a potential ambiguity between interpolating a
hash key, and a format specifier. Several solutions were presented,
including requiring `$()` for interpolation, a new quote operator, and
replacing the `%` with something else. The discussion continues.

### [Parrot 0.0.4]{#Parrot_004}

The latest version of Parrot is being wrapped up. The big feature of
this release is the foundation of the garbage collector. A formal
release announcement will be made, well, when this version is formally
released.

### [Multimethod Dispatch]{#Multimethod_Dispatch}

Michael Lambert
[asked](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg08793.html)
whether Parrot itself should support multimethod dispatch. Internals
head Dan Sugalski affirmed that it
[would](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg08795.html),
but only for method and subroutine dispatch. (As with most design
decisions, it's a speed thing.)

### [The Assembler PDD]{#The_Assembler_PDD}

Simon Cozens
[released](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg08803.html)
version 1 of the proposed Assembler PDD.

### [The Parrot Spotlight]{#The_Parrot_Spotlight}

[Alex Gough](http://users.ox.ac.uk/~shug0957/) is a physics student at
Oxford with interests ranging from quantum computing to DNA simulation.
He uses perl to do more in less time and hopes Parrot and Perl 6 will
allow cheaper, shorter, one-line solutions to troublesome but otherwise
irrelevant problems. He works on the big number and testing framework of
Parrot.

When not at his computer, Alex canoes on foamy rivers, teaches basic
lifeguarding, and helps mentally disabled children exercise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Bryan C. Warnock](http://members.home.com/bcwarno/Perl6/)


