{
   "draft" : null,
   "image" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "tags" : [
      "compiler",
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6",
      "pugs",
      "vm-development"
   ],
   "date" : "2005-08-25T00:00:00-08:00",
   "authors" : [
      "matt-fowles"
   ],
   "slug" : "/pub/2005/08/p6pdigest/20050825.html",
   "title" : "This Week in Perl 6, August 17-23, 2005",
   "description" : " All- Welcome to another Monday summary, which hopefully provides some evidence that Mondays can get better. It always feels like writing summaries is an uphill battle, so perhaps I should switch to writing about Perl 6 Language first and...",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





\
All--

Welcome to another Monday summary, which hopefully provides some
evidence that Mondays can get better. It always feels like writing
summaries is an uphill battle, so perhaps I should switch to writing
about *Perl 6 Language* first and *Perl 6 Compilers* last. Then it will
be downhill--maybe next time.

### *Perl 6 Compilers*

#### [More Random Pictures](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/5df6d5df1f7334c9/b37e4512b56d673a#b37e4512b56d673a)

Autrijus posted links to two more images he had created. This time the
images were not about Pugs, but were just kind of cute. He also provided
an explanation of one when prompted.

#### [Methods as Functions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/991210418285b790/764485d7f50ba0d6#764485d7f50ba0d6)

Yiyi Hu noticed that it was impossible to use a method of one argument
as a function. Autrijus offered Yiyi a commit bit, but also kindly
posted the resolution to *Perl 6 Language*. Thanks, Autrijus!

#### [Methods on Code Blocks](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/27b84b1000158dea/c8c3fa783e9e12ff#c8c3fa783e9e12ff)

Yiyi Hu discovered that `{ a b c }.pairs` would cause Pugs to spin out
of control. Luke Palmer fixed it. Hopefully one of the two of them added
a test.

#### [Autrijus' Secret Sauce](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/02299ab5870973c4/8e32342c5609a396#8e32342c5609a396)

Kris Bosland asked a few question I have been wondering about Autrijus'
new graphics. Autrijus kindly provided the answers.

#### [Documentation Attack](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/8bd2f4f42b70f313/61b3de1e503a2079#61b3de1e503a2079)

Kevin Tew has decided the best way for him to delurk is to update
documentation for Pugs. Dudley Flanders and chromatic both provided
support, information, and suggestions for him.

#### [Neko VM](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/e2bdf956e1e221a1/72f5247ee7649c7f#72f5247ee7649c7f)

Nicolas Cannasse announced his release of a high-level, multi-language
VM and wondered what others thought of creating a Perl 6-to-Neko
compiler. Autrijus and Leo provided a few corrections and comments.

### Parrot

#### [The FAQ, She is *Gone*!](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/2cbcd0b56016f39e/f603de821bd82788#f603de821bd82788)

Amias Channer noticed that the FAQ on *parrotcode.org* was gone. While
no one responded, the FAQ appears to be back.

#### [Platform-Specific C Files](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a1a2585585948a0e/1e57f5a3d76d39be#1e57f5a3d76d39be)

Stephen Hill wanted to know where to put a platform-specific C file to
provide missing functionality. Leo provided a few friendly pointers.

#### [`TclArray.get`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/ef0a4c8f958ef68a/1b62eeff558fafbf#1b62eeff558fafbf)

Amos Robinson provided an implementation of `get` for `TclArray`. Will
gratefully applied the patch.

#### [ICU Being Passed Up](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d4d70231f322b5a7/09a158e118872b35#09a158e118872b35)

Adrian Lambeck wondered if *Configure.pl* was passing up ICU. Warnock
applied, so Adrian took matter into his own hands by providing a
possible solution. Jerry Gay offered to take ownership of the problem if
no ICU-enabled soul picked it up. There have been no progress reports
since then, though.

#### [Java on Parrot](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/fb87be7c89a064fd/695419f2c8dff8ff?utoken=6-o-ZDcAAADWXQ4sS--whFjzzhFxvEM0yxapKbptX7zZ7xn9_uPzOhCI8nEEOQevUhyvpyHCHJ_Rs3VGheUC2BMy_BEOeGIM)

Tim Bunce asked some preliminary questions about running Java with
Parrot. I provide preliminary answers, and Nattfodd and Autrijus posted
links to related work. The important question of what to call it
remained unraised. I vote for "Jot."

#### [*gdbmhash.t* Failures](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/cfa8a4023a1c428b/04198072ba7640e3#04198072ba7640e3)

Tim Bunce noticed that *gdbmhash.t* was failing with an unhelpful error
message. Andy Dougherty provided a patch that made the error message
slightly more helpful. Jerry Gay applied it.

#### [`BEGIN` Blocks](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e368bdce610d3a36/6d17bfa68979833b#6d17bfa68979833b)

Leo posted some [thoughts and information about `BEGIN` blocks in Perl 6
and the `@IMMEDIATE` pragma in
PIR](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/bca89d6f066ff4d5/ff59334843ed8a09#ff59334843ed8a09).
It involved creating constant PMCs and freezing them into the bytecode.
Then he made it work.

#### [Amber for Parrot](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/838867df299aa9d5/50d2592e48e9fca6#50d2592e48e9fca6)

Citing chatter overheard on its intelligence networks, Parrot raised the
terror alert to Amber, or maybe Roger Browne released version 0.2.3 of
his "Eiffel-like" scripting language, Amber. I can never keep track of
these things.

#### [Tcl `parray`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/50d7bf4bc9de1965/98355c62212be267#98355c62212be267)

Amos Robinson offered to provide an implementation of Tcl's `parray`,
including tests. Will wanted to apply it, but the attachment did not
come through.

#### [Parrot Vs. Neko](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/33b939f5da9cd02c/6c3a82da7890e791#6c3a82da7890e791)

Nicolas Cannasse wondered why Parrot performed so poorly on the fib
benchmark. Leo explained that this benchmark stressed a currently
unoptimized portion of Parrot (function calls). He also provided a few
pointers on which benchmarks Parrot does well.

#### [Using PMCs from C](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e21e0822d799bc59/c6056fdb34ba43ee#c6056fdb34ba43ee)

Klaas-Jan Stol's Lua compiler uses only PMCs. Thus, he wanted to know
how to access these PMCs from NCI functions. Leo provided an answer, but
also suggested he look at the new calling conventions, which perform
auto-conversion in both directions.

#### [PMC for Reference Counting](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/7a27e6d3f08791e3/11797f657fac9f96#11797f657fac9f96)

Nicholas Clark posted a relatively full analysis of how to generalize
the DOD's registration system for further reuse. He also asked for ideas
about names. I think the whole thing looks good and that "AddrRegistry"
is a good name. Perhaps that has too many vowels--"AddrRgstry" and
sometimes "AddrRgstr" might work.

### *Perl 6 Language*

#### [Type Inferencing in Perl 5](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/5ea04271d14d1735/c3fb0f3d9389ac94#c3fb0f3d9389ac94)

Autrijus (while discussing type inference in Perl 6) recalled that there
was a Google Summer of Code project on [type inferencing in Perl
5](http://search.cpan.org/perldoc/Devel::TypeCheck). Gary Jackson, the
summer coder, provide a more detailed description of his work.

#### [`+"hello"`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/89fc3e95a0ecb80d/9a8a8d8ae66896a5#9a8a8d8ae66896a5)

Daniel Brockman wondered if `+"hello"` still evaluated to a NaN. Larry
reasoned that it might, and then went on to speculate about the what the
extra exception information would do when a `Num` gets jammed into a
`num`.

#### [Generic Classes](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/f5d1415442ec3a4c/b2923a4a9bc6a21f#b2923a4a9bc6a21f)

Autrijus found the frequent use of generic classes confusing, as he
thought that only roles were type parameterizable. Larry explained that
roles could be promoted to classes pretty easily, but that the
distinction between them was still useful and meaningful.

#### [GC API](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/d6bc9237b9210a4b/002483f30c6191a0#002483f30c6191a0)

David Formosa posted a revised GC API after the previous discussion.
More discussion ensued.

#### [Name Conflicts](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/577cce02541d3c9d/e07672b3e69f9a23#e07672b3e69f9a23)

Yiyi Hu wondered what would happen if he declared two lexicals with
different declarators. Larry answered that it would be a compile-time
error.

#### [Parsing Numbers](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/61f4044520874f29/bce78cf3287e4b20#bce78cf3287e4b20)

Ingo Blechschmidt posted a list of different possible ways to write
numbers, asking which were valid and which not. Many weighed in,
including Larry.

#### [Bindings and Routine Signatures](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/53232788dc4c7341/ae4d28708146c1f7#ae4d28708146c1f7)

Luke Palmer noticed that implementing binding as anonymous subroutines
and then binding existing variables created delimited continuations, and
binding globals, full continuations. While interesting, Warnock applies.

#### [Visibilty of `$?SELF` and `$?CLASS`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/6dadcb39e23cc5a3/814d5f890cb8a43c#814d5f890cb8a43c)

Stevan Little wondered what scopes will have `$?SELF` and `$?CLASS`
available to them. Larry provided answers.

#### ["Time to Take Her Home Her Dizzy Head is Conscience-Laden"](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/c19bea30514933f4/a10c571d683f9567#a10c571d683f9567)

Amusingly enough, the thread about time has a big gap between July 5 and
August 15. The thread also reminded me why I have an analog watch.

#### [Is Params::Validate Necessary?](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/c1aa2d1bea721f06/f627657ac28724cb#f627657ac28724cb)

Dave Rolsky hoped that Params::Validate would no longer be necessary in
Perl 6. This led to much discussion of the parameter declaration syntax
in Perl 6 and a few suggested changes.

#### [Constants are Dead; Long Live Read-Only!](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/2e66199c576a8436/66d074fed528ff06#66d074fed528ff06)

Apparently `is constant` is gone and `is readonly` is here. The
discussion contains mores than that, but that is my take-away point.

#### [Multidimensional Hyper Ops](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/7233bd8e8a597da9/ca18a76f98fb7633#ca18a76f98fb7633)

Luke Palmer wondered how hyper ops would work on multi-dimensional
inputs. The short answer is "recurse when possible, apply when not."

#### [Serializing Code](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/9d416d7fa643e7b3/86deff4c1b749572#86deff4c1b749572)

Yuval Kogman posted an analysis of a new HTML::Prototype module that
hinges on serializing code between the various layers of implementation.
Many folks thought this was cool and discussion ensued.

#### [Slurpy Hash](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/f6ed7b076781243d/67cb807fbf3e4432#67cb807fbf3e4432)

Luke Palmer wondered if one could bind a slurpy hash by name. The answer
is no.

#### [Making Pairs Less Magical](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/14ab4e67088e4bf1/e9b1e791ac08d43b#e9b1e791ac08d43b)

Luke Palmer wants pairs to be less magical, as their special treatment
has caused much confusion of late. Much discussion continues.

#### [Lazy Scalars?](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/8953c45b2d6e7d33/5675c9fddfb1612a#5675c9fddfb1612a)

Yiyi Hu wants lazily evaluated scalars. Ingo Blechschmidt, Luke Palmer,
and Larry all provided ways to achieve that end. The simplest solution
is to create an anonymous closure, it seems.

#### [Using Foreign Languages](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/3439e609dc66e2a4/8e313d44d1218bf5#8e313d44d1218bf5)

Ingo Blechschmidt wondered how to use identifiers from other languages
that do not have compatible identifiers. Yuval reasoned that it would be
dangerous to try to accommodate them too closely. Perhaps something like
the Sinhala "karenawa," which marks the preceding word as being foreign
(English specifically), will work?

#### [Symbolic References](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/665698a47599cf92/fa397dbfbefc62c2#fa397dbfbefc62c2)

Ingo Blechschmidt wondered to use symbolic references of magic variables
such as `$?SELF`. Larry provided a few answers.

### The Usual Footer

To post to any of these mailing lists please subscribe by sending email
to `perl6-internals-subscribe@perl.org`,
`perl6-language-subscribe@perl.org`, or
`perl6-compiler-subscribe@perl.org`. If you find these summaries useful
or enjoyable, please consider contributing to the Perl Foundation to
help support the development of Perl. You might also like to send
feedback to

-   [The Perl Foundation](http://donate.perl-foundation.org/)
-   [Perl 6 development site](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/)
-   [Parrot Blog aggregator](http://planet.parrotcode.org/)


