{
   "tags" : [
      "compiler",
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6"
   ],
   "date" : "2004-11-18T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2004/11/p6pdigest/20041115",
   "draft" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "matt-fowles"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "title" : "This Week in Perl 6, November 9 - 15 2004",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "description" : "All~ Welcome to yet another Monday summary. This would have been a Sunday summary, but Avernum (from Spiderweb Software) forcibly prevented it. As usual, we will start out with Perl 6 Language. Perl 6 Language Modules and Exports Aaron Sherman..."
}





All\~

Welcome to yet another Monday summary. This would have been a Sunday
summary, but [Avernum](http://www.avernum.com/avernum/) (from Spiderweb
Software) forcibly prevented it. As usual, we will start out with Perl 6
Language.

### Perl 6 Language

#### [Modules and Exports](http://xrl.us/dy47)

Aaron Sherman wanted to know some specifics about exporting things from
modules. In particular, he did not want to have to retype a whole bunch
of things. Larry gave an answer indicating that some of what Aaron wants
should occur, but some things are difficult for good reason.

#### [`AUTOCLASS(DEF)?` Hooks](http://xrl.us/dy48)

Rod Adams wanted to know if he could get `AUTOCLASS` and `AUTOCLASSDEF`
hooks. Larry told him that he probably could. Rod also wanted module
name aliasing. Larry told him that he could. Rod wanted to have module
names with arbitrary strings. Larry told him that he could. Rod wanted
to be able to load multiple versions of the same module. Larry told him
that he could. The summarizer wanted each question of a different focus
to be in a different message. Hopefully, Larry will tell him that they
should...

#### [Matching the *n*th Occurrences](http://xrl.us/dy49)

Sudarshan Gaikaiwari wanted to know how to match the "second last"
occurrence in Perl 6 rules. I think he might have posted directly to
Google Groups, as I did not receive it in my email and nobody replied.
The example Sudarshan gave matches the seconded occurrence. As I am not
sure what Sudarshan meant by "2nd last", I will answer the question I do
know. `m:2nd/foo/` will match the second occurrence of foo. You can
access the nth occurrence similarly.

### Perl 6 Compilers

Once again it is a race to see whether someone posts a comment to, or
Google picks up, Perl 6 Compilers first.

### Parrot

Welcome to the week of the continuation. If continuations make your head
hurt overly, I advise taking a few Advils before continuing. If
continuations are the way you naturally think, I advise you to stop
playing with LISP compilers.

#### [String Pinning](%3Ehttp://xrl.us/dy5a)

Bernhard Schmalhofer wanted to pass the same C string into two different
external functions so that the first could do things to it that the
second required. However, the solution that he found kept eating his
string after the first invocation. Dan and Leo concluded that using the
`b` parameter for NCI is correct in this situation.

#### [GC Invocation](%3Ehttp://xrl.us/dy5b)

Last week Leo posted a radical idea about GC invocation. I decided not
to invoke Warnock's Dilemma too soon. This week, I invoke it.

#### [`perl` vs. `/usr/bin/perl`](%3Ehttp://xrl.us/dy5c)

Gerd Pokorra requested that `#! perl` change to `#! /usr/bin/perl`.
Although Warnock applied, I think this will likely not happen. Not all
systems have Perl installed in */usr/bin/* and people might want to
change which `perl` to invoke by changing their paths.

#### [Command Line Support for Various Compilers](http://xrl.us/dy5d)

Will Coleda added a TODO item so that Parrot can take various compiler
arguments on the command line. What are you waiting for?

#### [Register Stomping](http://xrl.us/dy5e)

Matt Diephouse had troubles with his newly updated Forth compiler. The
verdict seems to be that he has uncovered a bug. To quote Matt,
"\*sigh\*."

#### [Calling Continuations, Basic Blocks, and Register Allocation](http://xrl.us/dy5f)

Either Leo or Jeff Clites (I don't recall who) started what is probably
the largest thread for this week, focusing on register allocation and
continuation troubles. Apparently the presence of continuations can
unduly extend the lifetime of registers (as can try-catch things, but
they seem less important). The suggested solutions all have some
shortcomings, although it appears that only using lexicals is winning.

#### [Basic Compilation Example](http://xrl.us/dy5h)

Jeff Clites wondered how something like `(a + b)` would compile. The
answer is to initialize an intermediate PMC to `Undef`, which will morph
as appropriate.

#### [`Eval` Changes](http://xrl.us/dy5i)

Leo updated the implementation of `eval` to make it even cooler, or
possibly just clean it up and fix some bugs ... I forget.

#### [Basic Operations for MMD](http://xrl.us/dy5j)

Dan asked for volunteers to spec out the basic vtable and MMD functions
for CLS (common language specification-or-other). Sam Ruby said he would
be willing to take a stab at it in a few weeks. One week has gone by and
Sam grows ever closer to stabbing things.

#### [No Limit on IMCC Identifier Length](http://xrl.us/dy5k)

Will Coleda noted that there was no limit on the length of IMCC
identifiers. Here come the `eval` buffer overflow attacks....

#### [Duplicate Local Labels Break PASM](http://xrl.us/dy5m)

Will noticed that duplicate local labels cause IMCC to output broken
PASM. I could be mistaken, but I though that IMCC -&gt; PASM has been
broken for a while...

#### [Parrot API](http://xrl.us/dy5n)

Leo wondered if the `parrot_api.pl` could be less strict about what it
thinks is and is not public. Jarkko Hietaniemi responded that this was
not his call to make, and silence reigned supreme.

#### [Empty Sub Troubles](http://xrl.us/dy5o)

Will Colleda posted a bug for empty subs in IMCC. StÃ©phane Payrard
provided a fix. Leo applied it.

#### [Languages with Object Support?](http://xrl.us/dy5p)

Jeff Horwitz wondered if there were any languages with object support
that he could bend to the evil ends of mod\_parrot. While no one
answered, I think Parakeet might be such a language....

#### [WinXP Problems](http://xrl.us/dy5q)

Christian Lott has been having troubles with WinXP, in particular with
*ops2vim.pl*. Read on for the blow-by-blow.

#### [Strings + Working Correctly = Pain](http://xrl.us/dy5r)

In his noble efforts to make Parrot respect foreign languages and
cultures, while not necessitating ICU, Dan has massively reworked
strings. He reports ... progress. He also posed a question for all to
ponder: "How global should the defaults be?"

#### [runtime/parrot/library/config.pbc](http://xrl.us/dy5v)

Nicholas Clark wondered what would generate this file. Leo answered.
Nicholas tracked his problem down to a quirk in FreeBSD `make` and fixed
it.

#### [`#line` Directives from PMC Files](http://xrl.us/dy5w)

Nicholas Clark announced his triumph over `#line` directives in
*pmc2c2.pl*. People were impressed, but promptly asked how to turn it
off. Kids these days don't appreciate what they have. ;-)

#### [Tail Calls](http://xrl.us/dy5x)

Jeff Clites asked about tail calls in the presence of continuations.
After much debate, the consensus seems to be that they don't affect each
other much at all. In fact, continuations make tail calls easier.
However, the topic was broached as to whether these were an optimization
that IMCC should detect, or should compilers generate them explicitly. I
think the final decision was compiler generated, although I doubt I
would be alone in not minding if IMCC had a flag to allow it to add them
as it saw fit....

#### [Character Classes](http://xrl.us/dy5y)

Patrick R. Michaud wanted to know if Parrot had character class support
(that is, checking membership). Leo responded that it would after Dan's
aforementioned string stuff.

#### [`POSTCOMP` vs. `LOAD`](http://xrl.us/dy5z)

Leo asked about the differences between `POSTCOMP` and `LOAD`. Dan
provided the answer: `POSTCOMP` runs only when (and as soon as) the sub
is compiled. `LOAD` runs when the sub is loaded. This need not be the
same time if the source is used to generate bytecode that is later
executed.

#### [Register Allocation/Spilling/Volatility](http://xrl.us/dy52)

Jeff Clites suggested using variable-size register frames with explicit,
volatile and non-volatile sections. Leo responded that this would cause
serious code bloat, and pointed him to his and Miroslav Silovic's
"watermark" scheme. Others voiced support for this as well as removing
the implicit operands. Dan said no.

#### [AIX JIT Gnomes](http://xrl.us/dy53)

Adam Thomason observed that the AIX JIT problems have gone away and
thanked the gnomes responsible. Remember, the proper sacrifice for
little people like gnomes are mini-Milanos or other reduced-size cookies
(nothing from Keebler as the gnomes and elves have long-unresolved
issues).

#### [Register Allocation (Again)](http://xrl.us/dy54)

Bill Coffman's register allocator (or should I say his implementation of
the Matula/Chaitin/Briggs algorithm) grows ever closer to being
committed (although my initial prediction of two weeks ago was clearly
wrong). In fact, his algorithm is so good that it even turned up bugs
from other pieces of the code. Dan started a test run on his evil code,
so we should have truly stressed performance numbers within the next
several fortnights.

#### [IMCC Segfault on Bad `if`](http://xrl.us/dy56)

Gopal V found a way to make IMCC segfault. I think it is still waiting
for a fix....

#### [No `perldoc` == BIG FAT WARNING](http://xrl.us/dy57)

James deBoer submitted a patch to fail if the configuration step did not
find `perldoc` last week. This week the request has gone out to modify
it to warn in a big and preferably fat way. No answer yet.

#### [RT Clean Up](http://xrl.us/dy58)

Will Coleda, whose diligent minding of the RT queue is much appreciated,
closed a few tickets that no longer apply.

#### [BASIC Compiler](http://xrl.us/dy6a)

Will "Dr. Frankenstein" Coleda has attempted to resurrect the basic
compiler with some major surgery. He is making progress. Joshua Gatcomb
put out a request for a new maintainer.

#### [Config Provides Slightly More Info](http://xrl.us/dy6c)

Luke Palmer provided a patch for making *Configure.pl* slightly more
informative. Brent "Dax" Royal-Gordon applied it.

#### [Find-Method Inheritance](http://xrl.us/dy6d)

Sam Ruby asked for comment before committing a patch to allow calling of
attributes as methods and to allow inheritance of attributes. When no
one commented, he committed.

#### [Threads, Events, Win32](http://xrl.us/dy6e)

Gabe Schaffer pointed out some issues with threads and events from a
Win32 perspective. Leo pointed out that this has not yet been fully
implemented/abstracted/documented and observed that Gabe would be a
welcome volunteer.

#### [Core Dump on `japh16`](http://xrl.us/dy6f)

Bernhard Schmalhofer noticed that `japh16` core dumps. He also submitted
a simplistic fix.

### The Usual Footer

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl. You might also like to

-   [The Perl Foundation](http://donate.perl-foundation.org/)
-   [Perl 6 Development site](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/)
-   [Parrot Blog aggregator](http://planet.parrotcode.org/)


