{
   "date" : "2004-10-28T00:00:00-08:00",
   "image" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "tags" : [
      "compiler",
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6"
   ],
   "draft" : null,
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "description" : "Perl 6 Summary for 2004-10-01 through 2004-10-17 All~ Welcome to my first summary. Since I am relatively new at this game, I will just steal Piers' approach and start with Perl6 internals. But before that let me warn you that...",
   "title" : "This Fortnight on Perl 6, October 2004",
   "slug" : "/pub/2004/10/p6pdigest/20041017.html",
   "authors" : [
      "matt-fowles"
   ]
}





Perl 6 Summary for 2004-10-01 through 2004-10-17
------------------------------------------------

All\~

Welcome to my first summary. Since I am relatively new at this game, I
will just steal Piers' approach and start with Perl6 internals. But
before that let me warn you that my ability to make strange characters
with accents is not great, thus please do not be offended if I don't
include them in your name. If you want them to appear in the future, a
quick email about how to make them appear using a U.S. qwerty keyboard
and Mozilla should suffice.

Also, groups.google.com does not seem to have picked up perl6.compiler
yet.

With that legal disclaimer out of the way onward to:

### Perl 6 Internals

#### Configure Problems and Improvements

Leo noticed that Configure doesn't rebuild things correctly. Takers
welcome. Nicholas Clark added a `--prefix` option for the `make install`
target.

<http://xrl.us/divy>\
<http://xrl.us/divz>\
<http://xrl.us/div2>\

#### [Non-core Module Dependency](http://xrl.us/div3)

Joshua Gatcomb accidentally introduced a dependency on Config::IniFiles.
Since it is implemented in pure Perl he offered to add it to the
repository. Warnock applies.

#### [OpenBSD Troubles](http://xrl.us/div4)

Jens Rieks found and fixed a coredump on OpenBSD. Thanks, Jens.

#### [Threads on Cygwin](http://xrl.us/div5)

Joshua Gatcomb discovered some trouble with threads on Cygwin. It seems
that there are problems with both the thread implementation, and the
tests not being generous enough if accepting out-of-order input. Still
unresolved, I think.

#### [Parrot IO Not Quite Threadsafe](http://xrl.us/div6)

Nicholas Clark discovered a double free in the IO system. While his
problem was solved by Jens, the underlying problem still remains.

#### [make install Portability Issues](http://xrl.us/div7)

Nicholas Clark asked why the install taget was not portable. Steve Fink
responded that it was a quick hack at the time and made it better.

#### Namespaces

The namespace thread continues to churn. It is slowly making progress,
but I believe there is a fair amount of people talking past each other
going on. Perhaps Dan could step in and provide one final state of the
namespaces?

<http://xrl.us/div8>\
<http://xrl.us/div9>\
<http://xrl.us/diwa>\

#### Parrot Abstract Syntax Tree a.k.a. PAST

Sam Ruby decided to pick up the Python on Parrot ball. To that end he
enquired as to what PAST is. Leo provided answers and help. Will asked
for more help. Leo once again provided.

<http://xrl.us/diwb>\
<http://xrl.us/diwc>\

#### JIT for Non-Branching Compare opcodes

Stephane Peiry provided a patch to JIT with some more opcodes. Leo
applied. Stephane then provided a patch with tests. Jens applied that
one.

<http://xrl.us/diwd>\
<http://xrl.us/diwe>\

#### Comparing Pythons

Sam Ruby posted a link comparing various Pythons and their conformance
to a test suite.

[Sam Ruby: Comparing Pythons](http://xrl.us/diwf)

#### Metaclasses?

Dan admitted confusion as to what exactly metaclasses are/do. Papers and
explanations were provided by Aaron Sherman, Michael Walter, and Sam
Ruby.

<http://xrl.us/diwg>\
<http://xrl.us/diwh>\
<http://xrl.us/diwi>\

#### [Plain Old Hash](http://xrl.us/diwj)

William Coleda wondered if Parrot had a basic hash implementation (not a
PerlHas). Dan said "D'oh!" and asked for takers. Coleda added a TODO.

#### [Parakeet 0.3](http://xrl.us/diwk)

Michael Pelletier's language Parakeet has hit 0.3 and been added to CVS.
Everybody should play with it.

#### [make install Thoughts](http://xrl.us/diwm)

Leo conjectured about creating a `parrot_config.c`, which would encode
all of Parrot's configuration. Then Parrot would know its own config.
Jens suggested letting miniparrot generate it; Leo agreed.

#### [More piethon](http://xrl.us/diwn)

Dan's register spilling problems give him free time. He used it to work
on piethon a little.

#### [Privilege Implementation](http://xrl.us/diwo)

Felix Gallo posted some questions/thoughts with respect to privileges.
While Leo addressed Felix's question about the location of source files
(and provided a nice plug for vim). The others all remain Warnocked.

#### [make in Languages/Tcl](http://xrl.us/diwp)

Matthew Zimmerman supplied a patch to fix Tcl's make. William Coleda
modified and applied it.

#### [MANIFEST Fix Up](http://xrl.us/diwq)

Andy Dougherty provided a patch to remove some old files from the
manifest. Steve Fink applied it.

#### [Parrot 0.1.1 "Poicephalus"](http://xrl.us/diwr)

There was a little talk about names. Then a little talk about getting it
posted to perl.org. In the end the 0.1.1 release did happen and even
made it to Slashdot. Thank you to everyone who contributed.

#### [Data::Dumper TODO](http://xrl.us/diws)

Will Coleda added a TODO for Data::Dumper. Apparently it cannot dump
FixedPMCArrays. Will conjectures that there are probably other new PMCs
it cannot handle either. Patches welcome.

#### [Emacs, XEmacs, and pir-mode](http://xrl.us/diwt)

Jerome Quelin kicked off a thread that resulted in emacs getting better
pir-mode support. Thanks to all involved, but I will continue to use
vim. ;-)

#### [A %= B](http://xrl.us/diwu)

Dan noticed that we did not have support for `%=` in PIR. There was some
confusion as several people rushed to the rescue. In the end, the
problem was fixed. Thanks all.

#### Pushing and Popping Arrays

Will Coleda wondered why he could not push onto a Fixed Array. The
answer was quickly provided that Fixed means that its size cannot be
modified, not that it is bounded. This answer seemed reasonable enough
to him. He then went on to ask why he could not pop a Resizable Array.
The answer is, of course, because it is not implemented yet; patches
welcome.

<http://xrl.us/diwv>\
<http://xrl.us/diww>\

#### [imcc Reserved Words](http://xrl.us/diwx)

Sam Ruby wondered how to create a subname `num` in imcc. The answer,
"No," and a workaround was provided by Jens.

#### [Quiet vs. Loud Build System](http://xrl.us/diwy)

Andy Dougherty provided a patch to improve the build system. Steve Fink
applied it. Leo disliked it. Consensus seems to be not to use it.

#### Cygwin Bugs

Joshua Gatacomb has been fighting with Cygwin getting Parrot to work.
Apparently we trip a few of its bugs. Read more if you like.

<http://xrl.us/diwz>\
<http://xrl.us/diw2>\
<http://xrl.us/diw3>\

#### [Python Concerns](http://xrl.us/diw4)

Jeff Clites raised some concerns about dealing with Python's bound and
unbound methods. There was some discussion about it. In the end it just
means a little more work.

#### [Makefile Cleanup](http://xrl.us/diw5)

Will submitted a patch to clean up the `Makefile`. There was some back
and forth about what parts of the patch should be kept.

#### Win32 Issues

Ron Blaschke provided a few patches for Win32 which Jens and Leo
applied.

<http://xrl.us/diw6>\
<http://xrl.us/diw7>\
<http://xrl.us/diw8>\
<http://xrl.us/diw9>\

#### Dynamically Loadable Modules

Steve Fink spent some time chugging away at dynclass and dynamically
loaded modules. There was some discussion of proper variable names and
some working out of problems. Friendly reminder -- when in doubt
`make clean; perl Configure.pl; make`.

<http://xrl.us/dixa>\
<http://xrl.us/dixb>\

#### [ICU Without `--prefix` Problems](http://xrl.us/dixc)

Steve Fink was apparently having troubles with ICU and locating
necessary data files. Leo confirmed that it is a problem.

#### [MinGW/MSYS](http://xrl.us/dixd)

Jens has apparently had success working with MinGW. Yay!

#### [ICU Issues](http://xrl.us/dixe)

Will had some ICU issues. Various suggestions and solutions were
attempted. Any success?

#### [Locals Inside Macros](http://xrl.us/dixf)

Will wants `.local`s inside `.macro`s. Apparently it can only be done if
your macro only takes PMCs.

#### [`t/pmc/signal.t` Improvements](http://xrl.us/dixg)

Jeff Clites provided a patch with improvements to `t/pmc/signal.t`.
Warnock applies.

#### [Co-routines and `--python`](http://xrl.us/dixh)

Michal at withoutane.com (whose last name I cannot find) wondered about
the `--python` flag. The answers and discussion that followed indicate
that it was a quick and dirty hack. Eventually it will be gone and
Python will have PMCs of its own (relatively quickly if Sam Ruby has
anything to say about it).

#### Small Patches

Sam Ruby fixed a small problem in PerlInt; Jeff Clites fixed a bug and
cleaned some warnings in *darwin/dl.c*. He also fixed some tests and
added a `Parrot_memalign` function for Mac OS X. Stephane Payrand
provided a patch to allow multiple identifiers on one line in pir.
Stephane also added a `get_representation` op. Bernhard Schmalhofer
added support for synchronous callbacks. Ion Alexandru Morega added more
functionality to complex PMC. Leo applied the patches.

#### [Link Failure on amd64](http://xrl.us/dixr)

Adam Thomason pointed out that amd64 lost a vital link flag somewhere in
the shuffle.

#### Non-vtable Methods on Built-in pmcs

Sam Ruby wondered about allowing pmcs to implement additional non-vtable
methods. Leo thought it would be good. Sam provided a patch, chromatic
tweaked it, and Leo applied it.

<http://xrl.us/dixs>\
<http://xrl.us/dixt>\

#### [Tinderbox?](http://xrl.us/dixu)

Jens wondered what happened to tinderbox.perl.org. Apparently it died a
while back and has not yet been resurrected. Robert Spier also noted
that it was a little difficult to deal with and said he is interested in
creating a new one. He is also looking for help in this endeavor.

#### [Register Stacks \[Again\]](http://xrl.us/dixv)

Leo has once again pushed forward his idea for register stacks and been
Warnocked.

#### [Ncurses Troubles](http://xrl.us/dixw)

Andy Dougherty had some ncurses trouble. In particular, one of the error
messages was exceptionally unhelpful. Now it is a little more helpful.

#### Coding Standards

Leo would like to draw everyone's attention to
*docs/pdds/pdd07\_codingstd.pod*, and the fact that it should also apply
to Perl code where appropriate. Thank you.

#### [`Rx_compile` and FSAs](http://xrl.us/dixx)

Aaron Sherman has some ambitious stuff in the works with respect to
regular expressions. Stay tuned for details.

#### [Single Character from STDIN](http://xrl.us/dixy)

Matt Diephouse wants to know how to get a single character from STDIN.
The answer seems to be no, but this has triggered Dan to go back to the
IO/Event doc. Best of luck, Dan.

#### [Parrotcode.org Samples](http://xrl.us/dixz)

Paul Seamons noticed that some of the samples on parrotcode.org are
really out of date. Will Coleda agreed and suggested that they should
all be updated to PIR, too. Takers welcome.

#### [Newcomers](http://xrl.us/dix2)

Pratik Roy wondered if he could join into the work on Parrot or if he
would remain an outsider looking in. Many people rushed to suggest ways
in which he could help. So, please don't feel afraid to contribute. At
worst a patch of yours will be turned away with an explanation as to
why. At best, you will start being referred to by first name only in the
summaries.

#### [Python and Perl Interop](http://xrl.us/dix3)

Sam Ruby wondered about how Python and Perl would interoperate. Leo,
Steve Fink, and Thomas Sandlass have ideas and suggestions. I think the
answer will be "magically."

#### Inline::Parrot

Ovid pointed the world at Inline::Parrot. It looks cool.

<http://xrl.us/dix4>\
<http://xrl.us/dix5>\

#### [Problems with 0.1.1 on x86-64](http://xrl.us/dix6)

Brian Wheeler had a problem with Parrot on x86-64. He provided a patch,
but Leo couldn't apply it and asked for a resend. Silence thereafter. .
. .

#### [Bug in Factorial?](http://xrl.us/dix7)

James Ghofulpo wondered if the Parrot examples page's factorial program
was supposed to truncate output. Warnock applies.

#### [*Configure.pl* Auto-detection](http://xrl.us/dix8)

Sridhar discovered that *Configure.pl* would fail if he told it to
`--cxx=/usr/bin/g++-3.3`; Jens pointed out that he would also need to
tell it `--link=g++-3.3`.

#### [Parrot Forth 0.1](http://xrl.us/dix9)

Matt Diephouse releases Parrot Forth 0.1. It has many cool features.
Nice work. Perhaps this should go into *languages/*?

#### [`.return` Directives](http://xrl.us/diya)

Stephane Payrard wants to remove the multiple meaning of `.return` to
provide a cleaner path forward. Everyone agrees.

#### [YAGCB (Yet Another Garbage Collection Bug)](http://xrl.us/diyb)

Will thought he had turned up another GC bug with Tcl. This time he
hadn't and it was his fault. Can't win them all I guess.

#### [Testing a PMC for Truth](http://xrl.us/diyc)

Will wondered how to determine a PMC's Boolean value. Leo pointed him
toward `istrue`.

#### [Grsecurity Problems](http://xrl.us/diyd)

Christian Jaeger noticed taht grsecurity was stopping on Parrot's
attempts to execute JITted code. Leo pointed out that we already have
support for doing the right thing, we are just failing to detect that we
need to.

#### [PMCs and Inheritance](http://xrl.us/diye)

Sam Ruby wanted inheritance for PMCs. Apparently what we really need is
a scheme for multiple inheritance of PMCs. Sam Ruby supplied several
patches and Leo applied parts of them.

#### [C++ and `typedef struct Parrot_Interp *Parrot_Interp` Don't Play Well](http://xrl.us/diyf)

Jeff Clites discovered that Parrot has troubles on Mac OS X because C++
does not like `typedef struct Parrot_Interp *Parrot_Interp`. We need C++
to link ICU. Fortunately, that particular typedef is out of the ordinary
and violates our normal conventions. Brent "Dax" Royal-Gordon threatened
to apply the (fairly large) fix. Will tested Brent's patch and gave it
the thumbs up.

#### [JIT, Exec Core, Threads, and Architecture Proposal](http://xrl.us/diyg)

Leo proposed mandating that all JIT must be done interpreter-relative.
This allowed some happy optimizations including constant table access.
General response was favorable.

#### [`pmc2c2.pl --tree` Option](http://xrl.us/diyh)

Bernhard Schmalhofer submitted a patch fixing the aforementioned --tree
option. No answer yet, but it has not really been long enough to
officially invoke Warnock.

#### [Unununium](http://xrl.us/diyi)

Jacques Mony asked for help/advice porting Parrot to unununium. No
responses yet...

### Perl 6 Compiler

Google groups still doesn't have Perl 6 Compiler, so this section won't
have links. Sorry.

#### Compilation Paradigms

Jeff Clites put out a request for some basic P6 examples and resultant
bytecode so that everyone would be on the same page. Warnock applies.

#### Internals, rules, REPL

Herbert Snorrason had some basic questions about Perl 6's interaction
with Parrot. He also wanted to know about whether he should be playing
with the re\_tests or if that was wasted effort. Finally he wanted to
know about read-eval-print loops. Sadly Warnock applies across the
board.

### Perl 6 Language

Google groups has nothing for Perl6.language between October 2 and 14.
Is this really the case? (I had not signed up until shortly before
volunteering to summarize.) If there is email that I just can't find, I
would be appreciative if someone could produce a summary or a pointer to
the missing mail for me. Thanks.

#### [Updating Multiple Rows](http://xrl.us/diyj)

Nitin Thakur attempted to de-Warnock himself, apparently unsuccessfully.
Sorry, Nitin.

### [Perl 6 Summaries](http://xrl.us/diyk)

Piers raised the white flag after several years as a wonderful
summarizer. Having now just finished my first summary, let me say thank
you for all of your hard work and if you ever want the job back its
yours. ;-) I hope you don't mind my stealing your general format for
these things.

### The Usual Footer

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl. You might also like to send feedback to <ubermatt@gmail.com>.

[The Perl Foundation](http://donate.perl-foundation.org/)\
[Perl 6 Development site](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/)\
[Parrot Blog aggregator](http://planet.parrotcode.org/)


