{
   "tags" : [
      "compiler",
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6",
      "pugs",
      "vm-development"
   ],
   "date" : "2005-06-30T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2005/06/p6pdigest/20050630",
   "draft" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "matt-fowles"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "title" : "This Week in Perl 6, June 21-28, 2005",
   "description" : " All- Long time no see ... err, write ... uh, read ... um ... this. Yeah, long time no this. As Piers hinted, two weeks ago I moved. Moving sucks. For those of you who care, I am still...",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6"
}





\
All--

Long time no see ... err, write ... uh, read ... um ... this. Yeah, long
time no this. As Piers hinted, two weeks ago I moved. Moving sucks. For
those of you who care, I am still in Cambridge; for those of you who
care more, I think you misunderstand the summarizer/summary reader
relationship. Essentially it revolves around summaries; the summary of
my move is Cambridge to Cambridge.

As Piers noted last week, this is a low-volume, high-action week, in no
small part due to the hack-a-thons. Last week's was in Austria, this
week's is near Toronto. Perhaps some nice soul who was actually at these
hack-a-thons will summarize them when it is over.

### Perl 6 Compiler

#### [PGE Announcements](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/abfc8d43c0030ae2/db08ca00d5df5bad#db08ca00d5df5bad)

Patrick announced that PGE now supports grammars and more built-in
rules. He even offered to field requests for built-in rules (although he
would prefer patches).

#### [Caller's Context](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/f26c2b6b94f58bec/4f9964a9246294c5#4f9964a9246294c5)

Gerd Pokorra wanted to know how to determine if his sub is called in
void context. He conjectured that `want` might fill his wants. There is
no response yet.

#### [Self-Hosting Goals](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/a7006466f65ed918/649a0c2ebdc39551#649a0c2ebdc39551)

Millsa Erlas explained that one good reason for Perl 6 to be
self-hosting is that it would allow the people who love it most (Perl
hackers) to hack on it. The theory is that low-level languages like C
unnecessarily narrow the field of contributors (especially those that
only know Perl). People expressed some concerns expressed over confusion
about the language Ponie should be written in. No one disputes that this
is C.

### Parrot

#### [Indexing Hashtables](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/47fabb48ef7956e8/b0617764c7f5cf9d#b0617764c7f5cf9d)

Klaas-Jan Stol asked for a clue bat with respect to indexing hash tables
in PIR. Joshua Juran and Leo each took a swing.

#### [Parrot Loses with Fedora Core 4](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/1d557b9589f65929/f387af585e3cea74#f387af585e3cea74)

Patrick reported that Fedora Core 4 and Parrot don't get along well. Leo
suggested a possible solution. Patrick has posted no response.

#### [Default Method Resolution Order](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/95280ad597d4790d/d5dc071ccab92032#d5dc071ccab92032)

Roger Browne wondered what the default MRO order is. Leo provided the
answer: left-to-right, depth-first, discard all but the last occurrence
of duplicates, divine intervention.

#### [Win32 Tests Failing](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/30bae80d039db434/38e92b8e886cb1a9#38e92b8e886cb1a9)

Craig the Last-Nameless-One posted a list of failing tests and problems
on Windows. Leo provided a few answers.

#### [Method Inheritance Needs Perl Loving](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a0dd2cb3fefa091b/1f5a59bc9780dd12#1f5a59bc9780dd12)

Leo announced a Perl job for the interested: method inheritance in the
PMC compiler. This naturally led to discussion of numerical hierarchies.
I was a little disappointed that quaternions appeared, but Hamiltonian
and Surreal Numbers did not. Honestly, where are our priorities?

#### [Tracing and Debugging Pain](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/63231fc4b4354b74/8308d6a82a7391ee#8308d6a82a7391ee)

Matt Diephouse posted a general description of the problems he was
having with tracing, debugging, and GC. Warnock might apply in a day or
two.

#### [Segmented Context and Register Memory](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/aac073aea211da64/3eb0faddd82cf78f#3eb0faddd82cf78f)

Chip posted a partial reply to Leo's context and register overhaul
patch. Andy Dougherty responded to some of Chip's finer points. If you
find the nuances of C's pointer pain interesting, this thread is for
you.

#### [Improving Parrot's Test Framework](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d9c6844fdd0370dd/89aeb7672bec78f4#89aeb7672bec78f4)

Chromatic wants to improve Parrot's test framework by stealing ideas
from Test::Class. He wants to know if anyone else has an interest.

#### [`setattribute` Fails with Multi-Level Inheritance](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/aa53a7af485b291f/7063cd92d09e5fa0#7063cd92d09e5fa0)

Roger Browne opened a ticket describing an error with `setattribute`
when using several layers of inheritance.

#### [Register Allocation Bug](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6c5863248089d19c/a86685a0a333ba85#a86685a0a333ba85)

Leo opened a ticket for a problem with improper control flow tracking.
Bill Coffman wondered whether the new register design is in place yet.

#### [Pass by Value PMCs](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a3e7c1a8234ed020/e249e566eb001b7b#e249e566eb001b7b)

Klaas-Jan Stol mused that the new calling conventions could work to
allow passing PMCs by value.

#### [Parrot Fall Down Go Boom](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a49d5b1ae8374fc1/844cb69766ad6b3e#844cb69766ad6b3e)

Matt Fowles reported a segfaulting Parrot that passes its tests. Sadly,
no one solved his problem in the four hours between his posting it and
writing the summary.

### Perl 6 Language

#### [You Know That, But You Go On](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/792e4adc208c9568/f4ca247b7b29cf04#f4ca247b7b29cf04)

As Piers noted, arguments about `./method` versus `.method` continue.
Like Piers, I don't like `./`. I guess I was the only person who liked
`$^` as the invocant. Ah well, I guess I will just go on summarizing.

#### [Binding Functions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/257b160616561992/d396c7a60a1d47a7#d396c7a60a1d47a7)

Piers wanted to use a Ruby idiom involving rebinding functions. Damian
told him that he could, but also pointed him to `wrap`.

#### [OO Questions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/caf03c9ef13ce6e5/8b7df20d9c8e6aab#8b7df20d9c8e6aab)

BÃRTHÃZI AndrÃ¡s posted a question about method calls in Perl 6. Juerd
and Piers provided answers.

#### [`AUTOLOAD` and `$_`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/69acf71fe3cc023e/01dcb95c7294c925#01dcb95c7294c925)

Last week's thread about `AUTOLOAD` continued. It still seems to be
fishing for some official decision.

#### [Magic Mutators and Proxies](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/5196c30a34c9d60a/87bf624ff2f251be#87bf624ff2f251be)

Sam Vilain wondered if he could make proxies behave like he wanted to.
Luke Palmer explained, yes, but he would need to use binding instead of
assignment.

#### [Quasiquoting and PPI](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/d1335f4b4c548a25/f4ab8859af6f2269#f4ab8859af6f2269)

Brad Bowman asked how Quasiquoting and PPI would interact with the AST.
Autrijus posted some explanation and Adam Kennedy cleared up some terms.

### The Usual Footer

To post to any of these mailing lists please subscribe by sending email
to `perl6-internals-subscribe@perl.org`,
`perl6-language-subscribe@perl.org`, or
`perl6-compiler-subscribe@perl.org`. If you find these summaries useful
or enjoyable, please consider contributing to the Perl Foundation to
help support the development of Perl. You might also like to send
feedback to

-   [The Perl Foundation](http://donate.perl-foundation.org/)
-   [Perl 6 development site](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/)
-   [Parrot blog aggregator](http://planet.parrotcode.org/)


