{
   "draft" : null,
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot-0-0-3"
   ],
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "image" : null,
   "date" : "2001-12-29T00:00:00-08:00",
   "authors" : [
      "bryan-warnock"
   ],
   "slug" : "/pub/2001/12/p6pdigest/20011222.html",
   "title" : "This Week on Perl 6 (16 - 22 December 2001)",
   "description" : "Notes You can subscribe to an email version of this summary by sending an empty message to perl6-digest-subscribe@netthink.co.uk. This summary, as with past summaries, can be found in here. Please send additions, submissions, corrections, kudos, and complaints to bwarnock@capita.com. For...",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





### [Notes]{#Notes}

You can subscribe to an email version of this summary by sending an
empty message to <perl6-digest-subscribe@netthink.co.uk>.

This summary, as with past summaries, can be found in
[here](http://members.home.com/bcwarno/Perl6/digests/). Please send
additions, submissions, corrections, kudos, and complaints to
<bwarnock@capita.com>.

For more information on the Perl 6 and Parrot development efforts, visit
[dev.perl.org](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/) and
[parrotcode.org](http://www.parrotcode.org/).

There were 110 messages across 32 threads, with 32 authors contributing.

### [The Perl Development Grant Fund]{#The_Perl_Development_Grant_Fund}

The [Perl Foundation](http://www.perl-foundation.org/) is raising money
to sponsor Damian "Mr. Language" Conway and Dan "Mr. Internals"
Sugalski. We're about a [quarter of the
way](https://donate.perl-foundation.org/index.pl?node_id=305) there, so
if you don't know what to do with the \$25 you received from Aunt Bertha
for Christmas, now you do.

### [A JIT Compiler for Parrot]{#A_JIT_Compiler_for_Parrot}

Daniel Grunblatt has an [early JIT
compiler](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07089.html)
in CVS now. Although it currently works only under Linux x86, it's
certainly an impressive demonstration.

### [Perl I/O]{#Perl_IO}

Melvin Smith
[asked](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07060.html)
whether Nick Ing-Simmons Perl I/O layer was going to be used for Parrot.
Given Dan's desire to support asynchronous I/O, there were several
conflicting opinions. The final result, however, was that Melvin was
going to [start from
scratch](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07081.html),
using Nick's Perl I/O code as a basis.

### [MiniPerl]{#MiniPerl}

Jeff Goff has been
[busy](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07048.html)
with MiniPerl, one of the languages distributed with Parrot.

### [Setline]{#Setline}

There was a brief
[debate](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg07083.html)
about whether to inline or offline `setline` operations . An out-of-band
index seems to be the current direction.

### [Exporter]{#Exporter}

Brent Dax
[posted](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg08824.html)
his thoughts on Perl 6's `Exporter` module. Michael Schwern [pitched
in](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg08831.html)
his objections.

### [Parroty Bits]{#Parroty_Bits}

The Perl and Parrot communities wish you and yours a happy and safe
holiday season.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Bryan C. Warnock](http://members.home.com/bcwarno/Perl6/)


