{
   "title" : "This week on Perl 6, week ending 2004-02-22",
   "date" : "2004-02-22T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2004/02/p6pdigest/20040222.html",
   "draft" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "piers-cawley"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot"
   ],
   "description" : " Loading bytecode at runtime Last week Dan had specced out the rules for runtime loading of bytecode. This week, Leo Tötsch started implementing it. There was a certain amount of quibbling about syntax, but that was quickly sorted out....",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





#### [Loading bytecode at runtime]{#Loading_bytecode_at_runtime}

Last week Dan had specced out the rules for runtime loading of bytecode.
This week, Leo Tötsch started implementing it. There was a certain
amount of quibbling about syntax, but that was quickly sorted out.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=200402200842.i1K8g4F15344@thu8.leo.home)

#### [Objects]{#Objects}

Dan continued his work on objects and on sorting out method resolution
niggles. Getting ahead of myself slightly, he finished it this week.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06010208bc581095417f@%5B172.24.18.98%5D)

#### [Obfuscated Parrot]{#Obfuscated_Parrot}

I reproduce this product of Leo Tötsch's warped brane without comment:

         bounds 1
         trace 0
         split P0, '', "\nrekcaH torraP rehtona tsuJ"
         add I1, 3
         add I2, 4
         branch I2
         pack S23, 793, I1, I0
         branch I2
         add I2, 382, I1
         branch I2
         new S23, 911, I0, I0
         branch I1
         transcode S23, S0, -19
         end

And, to compound things:

        bounds 1
        trace 0
        newclass P0, "Just another Parrot Hacker\n"
        shift S0, P5
        does I0, P0, S0
        add I0, 4
        bsr I0
        pack S0, 381, I0, I0
        invoke
        ret

Look, OO badness

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40309141.1030003@toetsch.at)

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=200402161324.i1GDOgu07546@thu8.leo.home)

#### [IO fixes for Win32]{#IO_fixes_for_Win32}

I must confess I didn't understand the details of the discussion, but
Goplat, Vladimir Lipsky and Melvin Smith spent some time working on IO
issues under Win32.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040216191018.52351.qmail@web20809.mail.yahoo.com)

#### [Parrot Dumper updated]{#Parrot_Dumper_updated}

Jens Rieks continued his sterling work on a Parrot Data::Dumper
equivalent, posting a new version that does bounds checking and PMC
property dumping. A later refinement added support for self referential
data structures and other edge cases.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=200402161908.40001.parrot@jensbeimsurfen.de)

#### [ConfigScript3]{#ConfigScript3}

TOGoS announced a new language targetting Parrot.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040217011132.40119.qmail@web41411.mail.yahoo.com)

<http://togos.dhs.org/projects/configscript3/>

#### [Symbol naming and IMCC2]{#Symbol_naming_and_IMCC2}

Dan ruled on the symbol naming issue discussion. Essentially, if your
symbol includes a sigil, you're not going to be able to use it directly.
Learn to love symbol tables and `.alias`{lang="und" lang="und"}.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06010209bc58266e6075@%5B172.24.18.98%5D)

#### [TODO: `parrotbug`{lang="und" lang="und"}]{#TODO:_parrotbug}

Dan asked for someone to implement a `parrotbug`{lang="und" lang="und"}
script to handle building and possibly sending the bug reports into RT.
The script should work in a similar way to perlbug, appending
configuration information etc to any bug report.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a0601020cbc5838c4acab@%5B172.24.18.98%5D)

#### [TODO: Forth as a compiler]{#TODO:_Forth_as_a_compiler}

Dan asked for a volunteer to fix *forth.pasm* so that it can be loaded
in as a compiler module, allowing one to do:

        compile P5, ForthCompiler, "1 2 + ."

and have it print out 3.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06010201bc5a61a7ddc0@%5B10.0.1.2%5D)

#### [Documentation tasks]{#Documentation_tasks}

Taking time out to heap praise on the deserving Michael Scott, Dan
outlined a few documentation jobs that need to be done (hopefully)
before the next Parrot release.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06010207bc5a93a41f3d@%5B10.0.1.2%5D)

#### [SDL goodness]{#SDL_goodness}

The work on SDL support continued apace, with chromatic checking in
several SDL related fixes and enhancements.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=1077165919.24319.72.camel@localhost)

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=1077166499.24310.78.camel@localhost)

#### [Parrot Day at the Austrian Perl Workshop]{#Parrot_Day_at_the_Austrian_Perl_Workshop}

Thomas Klausner announced that this year's Austrian Perl Workshop would
have a Parrot Day, with a tutorial from Leo Tötsch and hopefully some
other good stuff from Parrot luminaries. Thomas also asked for people to
submit talk ideas.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040220015102.GL2974@zsi.at)

<http://vienna.pm.org/en_workshop.html>

#### [SDL + Parrot = Tetris]{#SDL_+_Parrot_=_Tetris}

Jens Rieks announced the alpha of an implementation of tetris in Parrot
using SDL for the display. Yay Jens! Mmm... a time sink... just what the
Parrot developers need.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=200402200407.43622.parrot@jensbeimsurfen.de)

#### [The First International Workshop on Interpreted Languages]{#The_First_International_Workshop_on_Interpreted_Languages}

Dan pointed us all at the First International Workshop on Interpreted
Languages' Call for Papers.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06010207bc5c09cf7874@%5B10.0.1.2%5D)

<http://www.sebastian-bergmann.de/InterpretedLanguages2004/>

### [Meanwhile, in perl6-languages]{#Meanwhile,_in_perl6-languages}

#### [Traits/Roles]{#Traits/Roles}

I know I've had this feeling of déjà vu before, but I've spelt it right
this time. Discussion of Roles continued this week. If I never read
another discussion of the difference between `Dog::bark`{lang="und"
lang="und"} and `Tree::bark`{lang="und" lang="und"} again, it'll be too
soon.

#### [The Sort Problem]{#The_Sort_Problem}

The other topic of discussion this week covered sorting. It looks as
though Perl 6's `sort`{lang="und" lang="und"} function is going to be
rather more powerful than the Perl 5 equivalent; hopefully this means
Perl 6 will finally see the back of code like:

        map  { $_->[0] }
        sort { $a->[1] <=> $a->[1] }
        map  { [$_, extract_key_from($_) } @array

Damian's post on the subject, referenced below, looks like the front
runner. It's worth reading if you're interested in sort itself or if
you're interested in how Perl 6's multi dispatch will work.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=402FF9E1.90403@conway.org)

#### [Allison Randal is the new Project Manager]{#Allison_Randal_is_the_new_Project_Manager}

Nat Torkington announced that he's managed to pass the Perl 6 Project
Manager hat on to Allison Randal's increasingly be-hatted head.
Congratulations and commiserations to Nat and Allison. I'll leave it up
to you to decide who gets which.

[http://groups.google.com/](http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=94D27CCA-6319-11D8-811E-0003938ADEFE@oreilly.com)

### [Announcements, Apologies, Acknowledgements]{#Announcements,_Apologies,_Acknowledgements}

Um... I'm late. Sorry.

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl. You might also like to send me feedback at
[mailto:p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk](mailto:p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk), or
drop by my website.

<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation

<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site

<http://www.bofh.org.uk/> -- My website, "Just a Summary"


