{
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "tags" : [
      "compiler",
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6",
      "pugs",
      "vm-development"
   ],
   "authors" : [
      "matt-fowles"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "draft" : null,
   "title" : "This Week in Perl 6, August 2-9, 2005",
   "slug" : "/pub/2005/08/p6pdigest/20050811.html",
   "date" : "2005-08-11T00:00:00-08:00",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "description" : " All- Welcome to another summary, brought to you by Chinese food. The attentive among you will notice that this summary is a day late, because I did not feel like doing it yesterday. If only I could do that..."
}





\
All--

Welcome to another summary, brought to you by Chinese food. The
attentive among you will notice that this summary is a day late, because
I did not feel like doing it yesterday. If only I could do that at work.

### *Perl 6 Compilers*

#### [Pugs Argument Processing](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/be055bd40627492d/a60044757ceb3e61#a60044757ceb3e61)

Vadim Konovalov submitted a patch to Pugs affecting `@*ARGS` processing.
In the world of Pugs, this means that he received a committer bit and
applied it himself.

#### [Type Inferencing](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/114ffdd27a9cb125/e4a4dc51ec90239f#e4a4dc51ec90239f)

Autrijus wants to type push Perl 6's type inferencing as far as it can
go (and maybe a little beyond). To this end, he has been soliciting
input from all comers. It looks like he has put a lot of thought and
research into it. One day, I expect to be thanking Autrijus for
important (if likely difficult to understand) compiler errors and
warnings.

#### [`WWW::Kontent` Release](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/c27335567a8fc562/f11a7310269764d7#f11a7310269764d7)

Brent "Dax" Royal-Gordon announced the release of `WWW::Kontent` 0.01:
"a flexible web content management system written in Perl 6 and
executable with Pugs." It looks nifty to me. Maybe we need to fight Ruby
on Rails with Perl 6 on Pylons or something. That doesn't quite have the
right ring to it, but there has to be something catchy there somewhere.

#### [Array Interpolation](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/338b1f8acccceb81/b635247572c975e7?utoken=YHABADYAAAA7xVMbCVGjeIx9IodtUfMwhFkjZG-vgVJcJYMxbUTYyDTxzYJPNMPNXytgmAvkYeEWcO1g0jwXN3xYLXnEJ39L)

Phil Crow wondered why Pugs would not interpolate his arrays. Ingo
Blechschmidt and Patrick explained that `@foo` does not interpolate, but
`@foo[]` does. I sense a frequently asked question here.

#### [Pugs 6.2.9 Released](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/3ac98d6a866ae1c4/f9e5fa2b6e17c67b#f9e5fa2b6e17c67b)

Autrijus announced the release of Pugs 6.2.9. It is full of nifty new
features, including the ability to lay on hands!

#### [White Space Before Parens](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/3ac98d6a866ae1c4/f9e5fa2b6e17c67b#f9e5fa2b6e17c67b)

Andrew Shitov wondered why Perl 6 no longer allowed white space between
function names and parens. Autrijus explained that it allows
`print (1+2)*3` to print 9 instead of 3. As someone who just last week
explained the peculiarity of Ruby printing 3 in the above situation to a
complete novice, I welcome the change.

#### [Container Model Pictures](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/c236932902cb3333/c0a37ac28a00a3d2#c0a37ac28a00a3d2)

Autrijus posted a few pretty pictures explaining the [compiler
model](http://pugscode.org/images/simple-compilation.png) and the
[container model](http://pugscode.org/images/container.png). While the
compiler model was readily understandable to me, the container one
wasn't. Fortunately, when prompted, Autrijus provided a great
explanation to accompany the diagram.

#### [PxPerl 5.8.7-4](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/fbdc7bfb5ff3d803/588edb288e8527c7#588edb288e8527c7)

Upon discovering that Pugs released a new version, Grégoire Péan
released a new version of PxPerl that includes the new Pugs. I (and many
others) thank Grégoire for lowering the entry bar for Perl 6 hacking on
Windows.

#### [Hosting Lexical Declarations](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/05cc1e19db2fcc14/4814ff30475fc03e#4814ff30475fc03e)

Declaring lexicals mid-block confuses things, especially declaring them
mid-statement, as in `$x = $x + my $x if $x;`. Autrijus proposed
hoisting declarations of lexicals to the top of the block.
Unfortunately, this can make `CALLER::` do funny things. Thus, he
suggests outlawing it. Larry agreed.

### Parrot

#### [Export `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a929f3cbfe2aa9ec/25db76653bac717d#25db76653bac717d)

Bdonlan noticed that Parrot's test suite was not setting
`LD_LIBRARY_PATH`, which makes tests fail. Leo pointed out that most
users manually set their `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`, as Parrot often needs this,
but he agreed that the tests should do it just in case.

#### [Improved Argument Processing for *ops2c.pl*](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/cc9242e455d1a63b/5d25c6b934119abe#5d25c6b934119abe)

Tom submitted a patch that improves the command-line argument processing
powers of *ops2c.pl*. Warnock applies.

#### [ANSI Escape Codes in Parrot](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/be5dc2f14b0dfd42/896d89835150a493#896d89835150a493)

Klaas-Jan Stol was having trouble putting special characters like ANSI
clear screen and "¥" into strings. Nick pointed out that he need to be
careful with encodings and escapes. In Parrot, `\O` is an octal escape.
In Lua, it is apparently not.

#### [Parrot 0.2.3](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/b5b68a0cf335822b/4ac938caaa6ff298#4ac938caaa6ff298)

Leo announced the release of Parrot 0.2.3, "Serenity," which reminds me,
Firefly is coming back soon! I can't wait! Oddly, Google seems to have
swallowed his release notice, but not his warnings.

#### [Strange Filename-Based Bug](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d72580222deb1646/2b5afda2517c90bd#2b5afda2517c90bd)

Michal Wallace found a bug that would disappear if the file was renamed.
Leo, with the help of valgrind, provided Michal with a pointer. Michal
used that to find a likely culprit and provide a patch, which Leo then
refined.

#### [GDBM Hash on MinGW](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/455218c176531ba6/8bb0656904124f4c#8bb0656904124f4c)

François Perrad provided a patch fixing `gdbmhash` on MinGW. Bernhard
Schmalhofer applied it.

#### [PyString Link Problem](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/1b63e4b253bb0eab/b10f19b834c85c0d#b10f19b834c85c0d)

François Perrad also fixed a link problem with *pystring.o*. Jonathan
Worthington applied that patch.

#### [Filling a Large Data Structure](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/239e824edb7ff767/f1899af22d2a289e#f1899af22d2a289e)

Amir Karger wanted to know how to fill a large data structure in PIR,
other than explicitly. Leo suggested reading it in from a config file.

#### [Helping Perl 6](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d0083cd312e17ab1/eb025a6949933347#eb025a6949933347)

Rjtucke asked the ever-dangerous question, "How can I help?".
Unfortunately, I think he asked it on Google Groups, and thus no one saw
it.

#### [PGE Glob Escapes](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/94887d69a826227d/3f587ac32513e71e#3f587ac32513e71e)

"PGE Glob Escapes; millions die before it can be rounded up again."
Actually, Will Coleda noticed that he could not add a literal `*` to
globs in PGE. Patrick fixed it so he could.

#### [Language Test Requirements](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/3b9d082baa68c620/1f18c584c09e5053#1f18c584c09e5053)

Amir Karger has decided to write a Z-code-to-PIR translator. He wants to
integrate its test suite with Parrot's language tests. Unfortunately, it
does not use `Test::Simple`, or even Perl. Thus he wanted to know a good
way to integrate it. Will Coleda, Bernhard Schmalhofer, and chromatic
all provided suggestions.

#### [`mod_parrot` 0.3](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/16ec7ea4d9ba4872/b52140fff1d78310#b52140fff1d78310)

Adrian Lambeck provided a patch to fix *src/call\_list.txt* for
`mod_parrot-0.3`. chromatic applied it.

#### [Making Makefile a Little too Clean](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/91cb1b36db9f3f30/e85db560e0496873#e85db560e0496873)

Patrick noticed that the Parrot build was breaking. Jonathan Worthington
narrowed it down to an exact revision number. Leo realized his mistake
and fixed it.

#### [Cygwin Status](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/66c1435caa126e36/98038a170b66dea6#98038a170b66dea6)

Bernhard Schmalhofer applied some old patches from Joshua Gatcomb, in
the hope of improving Cygwin support. Nick Glencross provided needed
[Parrot Cygwin test
results](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6e3982c2438d4160/635220a375758f6d#635220a375758f6d).

#### [Calling `SUPER` Methods](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6782c143d9e3f9d7/0ab141d87d211369#0ab141d87d211369)

Klaas-Jan Stol wondered how to call a specific parent methods (possibly
bypassing child methods). Leo answered.

#### [Compiling Pugs and Parrot](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/065a98fa7217b71a/dedda1b8cd1df427#dedda1b8cd1df427)

Adrian Lambeck was having trouble compiling Pugs against Parrot. Leo
worked with him to find a solution, although they haven't resolved it
yet.

#### [Pure Parrot Test::Builder](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/8c040e2a5d3303f6/bdec8011da7b4800#bdec8011da7b4800)

chromatic has written pure-Parrot versions of Test::Builder and
Test::Builder::Tester. As always, patches are welcome.

#### [Adding a New Opcode](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/abcba81ef69f865c/b1d018e3114ce1f1#b1d018e3114ce1f1)

Gerd Pokorra wanted to know how to add a new opcode to parrot. Klaas-Jan
Stol and Leo provided answers.

#### [More Win32 Patches](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/5472a5cdd52bd3dc/a48d4d6482a9b13b#a48d4d6482a9b13b)

François Perrad provided several patches for MinGW and Win32. Warnock
applies.

#### [Updated *intro.pod*](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e36d2b676a916edf/41d4393ec1a5e334#41d4393ec1a5e334)

Jonathan Worthington posted an updated *intro.pod*. Autrijus provided a
few edits, and Jonathan is planning on committing it.

#### [Comment Fix in *pir-mode.el*](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/f2ea6e2b54a62425/53d23545fd068850#53d23545fd068850)

Jim McKim made the mistake of using Emacs. Fortunately, he
counterbalanced that failing with the virtue of submitting a patch to
fix an error in *pir-mode.el* to make the file work better. chromatic
applied the patch.

#### [Commit Bit](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/0d69e4b22417d1c7/95e0762f7e93b784#95e0762f7e93b784)

Curtis Rawls seemed to be having trouble using his newly acquired commit
bit. Warnock applies.

#### [Segfault with `-E`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6c9d5b091d9f074a/2518470dafaa44f2#2518470dafaa44f2)

Tom noticed that `parrot -E` segfaulted and provided a patch. He was not
very confident about the patch.

#### [`make test` in *bc*](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/636c7816a8e30105/e03cba61e9968bca#e03cba61e9968bca)

Amir Karger noticed that `make test` in *bc* dies because he does not
have `antlr` installed. Bernhard Schmalhofer said that he would try and
fix it up to use the config-test for `antlr`.

#### [*interpreter.c* Breakage](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/bed06d6981b46f90/20a4e2bc68c05819#20a4e2bc68c05819)

Amir Karger noticed that *interpreter.c* broke during a recent
compilation. Leo pointed out that he need to `make realclean`.

#### [MinGW Meets m4](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/73a2bf56f29a06c3/f6ba5da370dc450d#f6ba5da370dc450d)

François Perrad provided two patches to make m4 work on MinGW. Warnock
applies.

#### [`substr` Segfault](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/383873bdf6b2ae0e/72e13310f799ff92#72e13310f799ff92)

Will Coleda posted a short PIR test that will segfault in the `substr`
opcode. This led to some discussion of variable-width encodings. Leo
explained that `substr` was a call that would probably force Parrot to
rectify variable-width encodings into fixed-width ones (which it does
lazily). Then he fixed it (presumably as he had suggested).

#### [Parrot Cygwin Meets Treefrog](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6c34526dde0f3cc4/f0d9ef39989dd4a6#f0d9ef39989dd4a6)

Steve "treefrog" posted a patch he needed to get Cygwin testing. I think
he may have posted it to Google Groups directly, though. Warnock
applies.

#### [Call Opcode Cleanups](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/c7402b70371fb311/8c637a3801067f3a#8c637a3801067f3a)

Leo attempted to free himself from the horns of Warnock by reposting his
suggested call opcode cleanup. Patrick and I voiced our support. More
accurately, I voiced support and Patrick indifference.

### *Perl 6 Language*

#### [Complex Control Flow](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/23345901e82f1cb5/4fb0b85a4f5ffa2c#4fb0b85a4f5ffa2c)

Nigel Hamilton began speculating that Perl 6 might have an extremely
complicated control flow. Then he began to wonder aloud about a form of
control flow I can only describe as brain-melting. Luke Palmer suggested
that his proposal might best start as a module.

#### [Slurpy Parameters and Flattening](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/ebc571b19072db20/307e6736ab46b391#307e6736ab46b391)

Ingo Blechschmidt's question of the flattening (or not) of slurpy params
continued producing some suggestions. Piers seemed somewhat unhappy with
earlier answers, but the thread died out.

#### [Does `if` Topicalize?](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/0465204f271ce9cd/380c684482e0bb78#380c684482e0bb78)

Luke Palmer noticed `if foo() -> $foo { ... }` in an OSCON talk and
wondered if `if` now topicalized. Stuart Cook offered a workaround.

#### [Data Constructors](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/f00f1d5500c678f6/fb0eaa8a7b334f4d#fb0eaa8a7b334f4d)

Luke Palmer posted his thoughts on unifying units and data constructors
(as in Haskell or ML). Warnock applies.

#### [Calling Methods on `undef`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/615d21124b153ae0/f6cbeb1d58f527a8#f6cbeb1d58f527a8)

Ingo Blechschmidt wondered what would happen if he called `undef.chars`
or `char undef`. Brent "Dax" Royal-Gordon responded that it would return
`undef` in the absence of `use fatal`. Larry confirmed this behavior.

#### [Reassigning `.ref` and `.meta`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/21a135e1140c86cc/6b9a07062460e34c#6b9a07062460e34c)

Ingo Blechschmidt wondered what would happen if he assigned to `.ref` or
`.meta`. Luke Palmer figured that it would not be allowed. I think it
should cause a large person to come over to your house and kick you.
This is probably a good reason I don't write error messages.

#### [Questioning `.ref` and `.meta`](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/17e69f24e28c43b1/abc3309f3107553b#abc3309f3107553b)

Ingo Blechschmidt left a bunch of blanks for people to fill in with
respect to `.ref` and `.meta`. Luke Palmer apparently segfaulted in the
attempt to fill in the blanks.

#### [Subscripting Pairs](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/685af26a93bf2de5/5367cfdd8bda29e8#5367cfdd8bda29e8)

Ingo Blechschmidt wondered if one could subscript pairs. Larry declared
no.

#### [Perl 6 Test in Parrot 0.2.3](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/ec30cf943e4290b4/17263f56385a6b31#17263f56385a6b31)

Andrew Shitov was having trouble running Perl 6 under the latest Parrot.
Autrijus pointed out that he was trying to run the compiler attempt
abandoned in June of 2004 and then pointed him toward Pugs.

#### [Java -&gt; Perl ?](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/f20535fdbe875d63/c49c08621487c7f6#c49c08621487c7f6)

Tim Bunce wondered if any work had started on parsing Java interface
definitions and translating them to Perl 6. Warnock applies (which
probably means no).

#### [MetaObject Questions](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/5ea04271d14d1735/6db35ec67d56d088#6db35ec67d56d088)

Stevan Little posted some of his thoughts on the MetaObject internals
for comment. Many questions ensued, my eyes glazed over, the summarizer
punted.

#### [`defined` and `typed` Traits](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/8c5f8ce3d6b4bbbc/4fcbb26681d490eb#4fcbb26681d490eb)

Autrijus mused about how to deal with `defined` and `typed` traits in
Perl 6. This led Larry to wonder about `undef` being a class, or a class
being `undef`, or something confusing.

#### [`is constant` Sugar](http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/2e66199c576a8436/728ad09f9782b179#728ad09f9782b179)

Autrijus wondered how `is constant` would desugar if it were a special
form. Larry came up with suggestions, some of which said it desugared
and some of which said it didn't.

### The Usual Footer

To post to any of these mailing lists please subscribe by sending email
to `perl6-internals-subscribe@perl.org`,
`perl6-language-subscribe@perl.org`, or
`perl6-compiler-subscribe@perl.org`. If you find these summaries useful
or enjoyable, please consider contributing to the Perl Foundation to
help support the development of Perl. You might also like to send
feedback to

-   [The Perl Foundation](http://donate.perl-foundation.org/)
-   [Perl 6 development site](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/)
-   [Parrot Blog aggregator](http://planet.parrotcode.org/)


